Margins matter. The more ATP Oil & Gas (Nasdaq: ATPG) keeps of each buck it earns in revenue, the more money it has to invest in growth, fund new strategic plans, or (gasp!) distribute to shareholders. That's why I check on my holdings' margins at least once a quarter. I'm looking for the absolute numbers, comparisons to sector peers and competitors, and any trend that may tell me how strong ATP Oil & Gas' competitive position could be.
Here's the current margin snapshot for ATP Oil & Gas and some of its sector and industry peers, and direct competitors.
Company
TTM Gross Margin
TTM Operating Margin
TTM Net Margin
 ATP Oil & Gas
68.2%
(14.8%)
(36.2%)
 Cimarex Energy (NYSE: XEC)
83.5%
53.6%
33.6%
 Newfield Exploration (NYSE: NFX)
77.8%
53.2%
31.3%
 Williams Partners LP (NYSE: WPZ)
29.5%
22.1%
23.4%
 Noble Energy (NYSE: NBL)
79.9%
31.4%
20.1%
Source: Capital IQ, a division of Standard & Poor's.
Unfortunately, that chart doesn't tell us much about where ATP Oil & Gas has been, or where it's going. A company with rising gross and operating margins often fuels its growth by increasing demand for its products. If it sells more units while keeping costs in check, its profitability increases. Conversely, a company with gross margins that inch downward over time is often losing out to competition, and possibly engaging in a race to the bottom on prices. If it can't make up for this problem by cutting costs -- and most companies can't -- then both the business and its shares face a decidedly bleak outlook.
Of course, over the short term, the kind of economic shocks we recently experienced can drastically affect a company's profitability. That's why I like to look at five fiscal years' worth of margins, along with the results for the trailing 12 months, the last fiscal year, and last fiscal quarter. You can't always reach a hard conclusion about your company's health, but you can better understand what to expect, and what to watch.
Here's the margin picture for ATP Oil & Gas over the past few years.
(Because of seasonality in some businesses, the numbers for the last period on the right -- the TTM figures -- aren't always comparable to the FY results preceding them.)
Here's how the stats break down:
With recent 12-month-period operating margins below historical averages, ATP Oil & Gas has some work to do. There may be some hope in the last quarter's results, but only time will tell.
If you take the time to read past the headlines and crack a filing now and then, you're probably ahead of 95% of the market's individual investors. By keeping an eye on the health of your companies' margins, you can spot potential trouble early, or figure out whether the numbers merit Mr. Market's enthusiasm or pessimism. Let us know what you think of the health of the margins at ATP Oil & Gas in the comments box below. Or, if you're itching to learn more, head on over to our quotes page to view the filings directly.



Before you consider Noble Energy, Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Noble Energy, Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



