No stock is perfect, but some companies are just built to last in a way that sets them apart from the pack. Here are three stocks that stand out for their mix of relatively generous yields, strong businesses, and historical commitment to investors, a factor that has earned them the title of Dividend Aristocrats.
But there's a lot more to like here than just a 25-plus year history of dividend increases. If you are looking to buy and hold a stock forever, you need to take a look at Nucor (NYSE:NUE), Chevron (NYSE:CVX), and Consolidated Edison (NYSE:ED).
Nucor is one of the largest integrated steel mills in the United States. It has increased its dividend for 47 consecutive years, and currently yields around 3.75%, which is toward the high end of the company's historical range. Steel is a cyclical business, so the company's sales and earnings are under pressure right now given that the economy fell into a recession in February. That's actually an opportunity here, though, because Nucor has one of the strongest balance sheets in the steel space. The company's financial debt to equity ratio is roughly 0.45 times, which is pretty reasonable given the current market environment. The ratios of its closest peers are higher, some much higher. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
But there's much more to like here. For example, the company uses electric arc furnaces, which are more flexible than older blast furnace technology. It has a unique pay structure built around profit sharing, so employees make a lot when business is good, but share in the pain when times are tough (giving the company a break on one of its biggest costs right when it most needs it). And it has a vertically integrated operation, covering inputs (notably scrap metal), bulk steel making, and the production of specialty products (using a fair portion of the bulk steel it makes). It has a long history of industry-leading margins because of this unique combination of factors. It also tends to use its financial strength to invest in its business during downturns so it can come out the other side a stronger company -- something it is doing right now, with management announcing the green lighting of two projects during Nucor's second-quarter 2020 earnings conference call. 
Next up is international energy major Chevron, which has increased its dividend annually for 33 years. The company's 5.7% yield is also near historical highs. Like Nucor, it has peer-leading balance sheet strength, with a financial debt to equity ratio of around 0.25 times at the end of the first quarter. That number is destined to rise, however, because the oil industry is deeply out of favor today and the company is leaning on its balance sheet to get through to the other side.
But Chevron has a history of thinking long-term, focusing on supply and demand over decades, not months, which has historically served the company and shareholders quite well. It's highly likely the oil major makes it through this difficult market in stride. 

NUE DIVIDEND YIELD DATA BY YCHARTS
That said, Chevron isn't letting the industry downturn go to waste. It has stepped in to buy Noble Energy in an all-stock deal for $5 billion, plus the assumption of around $8 billion worth of debt. This move, assuming it's consummated as planned, will expand Chevron's U.S. and Mediterranean businesses. But the bigger takeaway is that Chevron is using this period of industry weakness to pick up good assets on the cheap, a move that bodes well for the future. 
The last of the Dividend Aristocrats here is Consolidated Edison, or Con Ed as it's locally known, a utility that provides electricity, natural gas, and steam to the New York City metro area. It currently yields around 4%, which is up from around 3.2% at the start of 2020. The dividend has been increased annually for 46 consecutive years. The rise in the dividend yield is notable because it relates to the severe impact that COVID-19 has had in New York, something that has led investors to dump shares. And to be honest, near-term financial results could be rough reading. 
But that's not the right way to look at Con Ed, or the utility sector in general. The company provides vital energy to a key global business hub that has a long history of resilience and growth. On top of that, its business is regulated, providing it with a monopoly in exchange for government oversight. Regulators tend to focus on things like reliability and storm preparedness, so spending and growth plans span years and generally live outside of Wall Street's ups and downs. Con Ed currently has plans to spend around $4 billion a year between 2020 and 2023, which back its expected average annual rate increase of 5% over that span. Yes, it's a difficult time, but Con Ed hasn't stopped moving forward, and that's an opportunity for investors. 
Investors looking for great dividend stocks need to step back and examine more than just yield. If you are going to buy and hold a company for decades, you want to know that you are investing in a name with a great business. Nucor, Chevron, and Con Ed are all names that fit that bill and offer above-market yields today. Take some time to dig in here and you'll likely find that one or more of these Dividend Aristocrats ends up in your portfolio. 



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


This year has been brutal for the oil patch. Dual shock waves slammed the sector earlier in the year as OPEC and Russia ignited a price war just as oil demand started cratering because of the COVID-19 outbreak. 
But global oil producers have since called a truce to help stabilize the market. That seems to be working as crude oil prices have rebounded sharply off their bottom.
Oil could have further to run as the global economy gets back up to speed, which could fuel gains for the oil stocks that survive this year's downturn. Three that our Motley Fool contributors think stand out as the top ones to buy this August based on that thesis are ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP), Chevron (NYSE:CVX), and Plains All American Pipeline (NASDAQ:PAA). 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Matt DiLallo (Plains All American Pipeline): This year's oil market downturn is having some impact on pipeline giant Plains All American. Oil demand cratered earlier this year because of COVID-19, which forced several producers to shut down their pumps temporarily. Because of that, lower volumes will flow through Plains All American's pipelines this year, which will cut into its cash flow. Overall, the company anticipates that this will affect the earnings of its transportation segment by $300 million, half of which it expects to recoup by capturing market opportunities via its supply and logistics operations.
That revised outlook has the MLP on track to generate about $2.16 per unit in cash this year. That's enough to cover its 9%-yielding dividend and virtually all its planned capital spending, both of which it reduced because of this year's downturn to preserve its financial flexibility and balance-sheet strength.
Assuming the company delivers on its revised outlook, it only trades at about 3.7 times cash flow, given its current unit price of around $8 following this year's 55% sell-off. That's an insanely low price for a pipeline company.
That cheap valuation suggests it could have lots of upside as the oil market recovers. Add in its big-time dividend, and this oil stock could generate strong total returns from here, making it a compelling way to play a rebound in the oil market this month.
Daniel Foelber (ConocoPhillips): Unlike many of its upstream peers, the strength of ConocoPhillips' balance sheet prepared it for the present collapse in oil and gas demand. The largest independent oil and gas producer quietly spent the past four years reducing its debt, selling off weaker assets, lowering its break-even price per barrel of oil, and stockpiling cash on its balance sheet. 
That preparation was good timing for 2020, when the company's low amount of debt and high free cash flow (FCF) has given it a valuable amount of breathing room to make adjustments without debilitating its business. Those adjustments include raising liquidity, reducing 2020 capital expenditures by 35%, suspending share buybacks, curtailing some production in the short term, and reducing costs to make sure that it can pay its dividend. ConocoPhillips looks well positioned to afford its dividend, which currently yields 4.1%.
In a time when many oil and gas companies are cutting their dividends, it can be refreshing to know that ConocoPhillips is far from that conversation. Its annual FCF is currently triple its annual dividend payment, meaning that even as FCF decreases from lost production and less spending, that decrease is unlikely to strain the company's ability to pay its dividend with cash. 
Strong FCF is one reason ConocoPhillips looks to be a great oil stock to buy in August. From a valuation perspective, ConocoPhillips is right up there with EOG Resources as having one of the lowest price-to-FCF valuations in the business, meaning that its shares are relatively cheap. 
ConocoPhillips isn't immune to volatile oil and gas prices, but it has done an impressive job of preparing its business for unexpected challenges. From income investors looking for a solid dividend to those who want to invest in oil and gas in a disciplined way, picking up a few shares of ConocoPhillips in August looks like a reasonable path to take.
Reuben Gregg Brewer (Chevron): If you are looking at oil stocks, one of the best ways to play the space is with an energy major like Chevron. It has exposure to a broad swath of the energy industry, from the upstream (oil drilling) to the downstream (refining and chemicals). That provides diversification that pure plays don't. Adding to the allure here is that Chevron also has one of the strongest balance sheets in its peer group, with a debt-to-equity ratio of roughly 0.25 times. That would be good for any company and gives it more leeway than its peers to lean on its balance sheet in these turbulent times. 

CVX DEBT-TO-EQUITY RATIO DATA BY YCHARTS.
The company also takes a conservative approach with its business, focusing on the long-term supply/demand dynamics and not short-term volatility. That's notable today, since oil prices are in the doldrums. But for long-term dividend investors, this could be a material opportunity because Chevron's stock is down and the yield is currently near the high end of its historical range. That suggests the shares are cheap today.
All in, Chevron is a leading industry player with a diversified portfolio and strong balance sheet that's trading at what appears to be an attractive historical valuation. There's a lot to like here. 



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


