After a slow start, the stock market extended yesterday's big gains with an impressive follow-through jump today. In some ways, investors seem to want news to be good but not too good, as the prospect of some form of government stimulus has acted as a backstop against major market declines ever since the financial crisis. The Dow Jones Industrials (INDEX: ^DJI) ended up with a gain of more than 110 points as the broader U.S. market outperformed most of the rest of the world.
So which companies were responsible for the Dow's nice gains? Let's take a look at three winners that lent support to the Dow today.
Wal-Mart (NYSE: WMT), up 2.8%
After days of declines related to its Mexican bribery scandal, Wal-Mart finally found itself in the win column today. The company still faces investigations, but an unrelated announcement poses an interesting opportunity for the retailer.
Wal-Mart said today that it will allow customers to make online orders but pay by cash by coming into a retail location. The customer can then choose whether to have the order sent to the store for pickup or shipped for home delivery. The move is an interesting way around the complications when customers don't have credit cards or other popular online payment options, and it could give Wal-Mart an edge over Amazon.com (Nasdaq: AMZN), which obviously lacks a retail presence to accept cash.
Chevron (NYSE: CVX), up 2.3%
Chevron announces its earnings tomorrow morning, but shareholders already got their gift in the form of a higher dividend payment. Yesterday afternoon, the oil giant said it was raising its dividend by 11% to $0.90 per share quarterly.
With the move, the company should qualify to join the Dividend Aristocrats at the end of the year, given its 25 consecutive years of raising its dividend. As long as high energy prices support its massive business, Chevron should have no trouble continuing that streak well into the future.
AT&T (NYSE: T), up 2.2%
A broken deal can leave a bad taste in investors' mouths until it's done and over with. Yesterday afternoon, the FCC gave AT&T the go-ahead to put its failed T-Mobile buyout behind it once and for all.
The FCC approved a transfer of wireless spectrum to T-Mobile, which was part of the agreement that the carrier had with AT&T upon the breakup of its proposed merger. With spectrum becoming an increasingly valuable commodity, AT&T will have to look for ways to obtain a replacement if it wants to keep growing at an optimal pace.
All earnings, all the time
Stay tuned as earnings season continues. And if you want some additional insight, find out about five stocks you should look at before their quarterly announcements to see if you can cash in on their results. But don't delay; accept this special invitation today.



Before you consider Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



After a big move up yesterday, it's only reasonable to expect the stock market to take a breather. But even while the broad market remains close to unchanged, as worries about tomorrow's U.S. GDP report offset enthusiasm over strong figures on pending home sales, the Dow Jones Industrials (INDEX: ^DJI) were up about 0.3% at 10:45 a.m. EDT.
Dividend hikes have been the name of the game for several Dow stocks. Yesterday, both ExxonMobil (NYSE: XOM) and Chevron (NYSE: CVX) announced that they would be raising their respective payouts, with Exxon vaulting its dividend 21% higher to $0.57 per share quarterly while Chevron settled for an 11% increase to a quarterly $0.90 per share. Some believe that Exxon could see additional rises in the near future, but for now, Chevron still has a big yield advantage over its larger rival. The two stocks are moving in different directions today, with Exxon down almost 2% while Chevron is up by nearly the same amount.
Boeing (NYSE: BA) gave back some of its gains from yesterday, which were fueled by its strong earnings announcement. The company announced that it would buy information-management company Inmedius, which serves several customers in the aerospace industry. The move shows that Boeing is more than just an airplane builder, and bolstering its technology presence should be a positive for the company in the long run.
Lastly, DuPont (NYSE: DD) was also down slightly. Rival Dow Chemical saw its profit drop from the year-ago quarter, and although it beat expectations, revenue fell short of analyst hopes. Dow Chemical fell 3% on the news, but DuPont could stand to benefit if it continues to execute well in tapping lucrative trends in the industry.
Keep on earnin'
Earnings season isn't over by a long shot. If you haven't read The Motley Fool's latest special report on this quarter's earnings, then you're missing out on five stocks you can't afford to ignore this quarter. Please accept my invitation to read the report for free by clicking here -- don't wait any longer!



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



Legendary fund manager Peter Lynch once said that you shouldn't invest in any idea you couldn't illustrate with a crayon.
Though I'm not much for crayons, I do love the pithiness of that line. We regularly preach the same idea at the Fool: Don't buy what you don't understand. And if you can't simply sketch out a company's business model -- how it actually makes money -- then maybe you shouldn't be investing in it.
While pumping gas recently, I realized that I hadn't seen a Chevron (NYSE: CVX) station in a while. A quick search on the Internet revealed that there are only two lonely stations in the greater D.C. area. So how exactly is Chevron making money? Here's a very simple visual that might help answer that question. (Note: I'm focusing on revenues here, not earnings.)

Source: Chevron 2011 10-K.
Think I missed something in this illustration? General thoughts on this exercise? Let me know in the comments section below. And if you haven't already, be sure to follow our Chevron news and commentary using the Fool's free My Watchlist tool.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



