Pfizer (NYSE:PFE) is one of the largest drug manufacturers in the world, and along with partner BioNTech and rival Moderna, it's one of the first companies to cross the finish line in the race to develop a COVID-19 vaccine. It has also raised its dividend for 10 consecutive years, and at current share prices, its payout yields an impressive 4%. 
In short, Pfizer may be one of the best COVID vaccine stocks -- but it's not the best dividend stock. In my view, Honeywell International (NASDAQ:HON)and Chevron (NYSE:CVX)are better picks for investors looking for steady income from quality companies.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Honeywell is a multifaceted industrial behemoth whose products bridge the gap between the physical world and the digital world. It's embracing the transition from industrial manufacturing to industrial connectivity, and is a leader in the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) and software as a service (SaaS) for industrial companies. 
The company had a decent second quarter and a strong third quarter. It's rebounding nicely from a pandemic-induced slowdown. Its free cash flow (FCF) remains strong, and after some goes to paying its dividend, what's left over can be used to pay down debt, buy back shares, or invest further into the business. Management is optimistic that the company will return to growth and margin expansion next year. 
Honeywell's history of performance and growth is impressive, but what makes it truly stand out is its balance sheet.

HON NET TOTAL LONG TERM DEBT (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS
Despite being the top U.S. industrial company by market capitalization, it has the lowest net long-term debt out of the 10 largest U.S. industrials. That low debt is Honeywell's ultimate ace in the hole. The strength of its balance sheet allows the company to make timely acquisitions during tough times, continue to invest when others are scaling back, and grow its dividend when others are cutting theirs.
Investors may be wary of big oil stocks in today's market. But Chevron is one of the most well-run integrated oil and natural gas companies. At current share prices, its dividend yields 5.8%. Also, with 32 consecutive years of payout raises, it holds a coveted spot on the list of Dividend Artistocrats. 
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted oil and gas demand, leading to short-term oversupply and lower commodity prices. In response, Chevron cut spending and selectively reduced production. The result is that Chevron expects to finish 2020 with spending significantly below its original capital budget of around $20 billion. That was right around what it spent in 2019. As of its most recent quarter, it's poised to finish this year closer to $14 billion. Those spending cuts have helped Chevron mitigate losses and limit its use of debt. 
Even with that reduced capital spending, Chevron found a creative way to grow its long-term prospects. It bought Noble Energy for $13 billion, which looks to be a bargain price given its asset portfolio. Noble is a big player in the Permian Basin, which is the largest producing onshore oilfield in the U.S. and Chevron's main long-term growth driver. That deal closed in October.
Management plans on further reducing costs in 2021, guiding for a capital budget of $14 billion that includes the former Noble operation. Of that amount, Chevron estimates that it needs to spend roughly $10 billion a year to sustain its production. Noble needs about $800 million. This means that there will be a significant amount of spending (even at this reduced level) going toward long-term investments. Looking back over the past five years, it's impressive to see the progress that Chevron has made at reducing costs while sustaining a healthy level of FCF.

CVX CAPITAL EXPENDITURES (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS
If FCF is too low, a company may cut its dividend or tap into its reserve cash to fund the payout. But that's a slippery slope because it can put a company's finances on shakier ground. This is exactly what has happened to many of Chevron's peers, which is one reason why Chevron has the best balance sheet in its cohort. Granted, Chevron's debt load has increased due to the Noble acquisition, but it remains at a healthy level.
Honeywell's growth prospects, earnings stability, safe and growing dividend, and financial health make it a premium industrial stock for long-term investors. Chevron is similar in that it has arguably the best balance sheet of the oil majors. And although Chevron's earnings have taken a major hit this year, its cost reductions and timely investments are a sign it is doing its best to navigate a challenging market.
Honeywell has a dividend yield of 1.8% compared to Chevron's 5.8%, which makes sense given Honeywell is the safer of the two. Investors should pick which company best matches their risk tolerance, but both are good dividend stocks to buy now.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Crude oil prices have strengthened a bit since the start of November. Energy stocks followed the rise in oil prices, with the sector outperforming the broader market in almost the last month and a half. Though energy stock prices are mostly dependent on the vagaries of oil prices, many of them offer a steady and growing dividend stream. Here are five top dividend stocks that are currently available on sale.
Chevron (NYSE:CVX) stock has fallen roughly 25% so far in 2020 and is trading at an attractive dividend yield of around 5.8%. The coronavirus pandemic severely impacted the demand for oil and oil products in March and April, and it hasn't recovered to pre-pandemic levels yet. Lower demand coupled with an excess supply sent oil prices down while hurting the performance of energy companies, including Chevron.
During the year, Chevron's earnings from its oil and gas production operations fell, largely due to lower oil prices. At the same time, its downstream earnings were hit by lower refining margins. The company has been reducing its operating and capital expenditures in response to market demand. Chevron has the strongest balance sheet among its top peers, which positions it well to weather the challenging market until the time oil demand and prices improve. That makes its attractive yield safe, too.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Pipeline MLP Enterprise Products Partners (NYSE:EPD) is one of the energy companies that was least affected by the recent turmoil in commodity prices. Enterprise Products' diversified operations and fee-based contracts help it generate fairly consistent cash flows irrespective of oil and gas prices. In the third quarter, the company generated distributable cash flow (DCF) of $1.6 billion -- flat compared to the year-ago quarter. 
Another key factor that sets Enterprise Products apart from its peers is its financial discipline. With a debt-to-EBITDA ratio below four times, it is one of the least leveraged midstream operators. The company's DCF was 1.7 times its distributions for the third quarter. Diversified fee-based cash flows, conservative leverage, and strong distribution coverage mean that the company can easily maintain its above-8% yield. The stock is down roughly 25% year to date, offering an attractive entry point for long-term investors.
For investors not interested in MLPs because of the tax headaches that come with owning a partnership, Kinder Morgan (NYSE:KMI) offers an attractive option to invest in the energy pipeline and infrastructure segment. The company moves roughly 40% of the natural gas consumed in or exported from the U.S. Natural gas is expected to continue to be a key element of the world's energy mix, as energy demand from emerging economies continues to rise.
A major chunk of Kinder Morgan's cash flow is backed by take-or-pay and fixed-fee contracts that ensure the company's revenue is steady regardless of commodity prices or how much customers use its pipelines. Similarly, the bulk of the remaining cash flow is hedged, with just 2% exposed to commodity prices. That minimizes the impact of commodity price fluctuations on the company's cash flows. Kinder Morgan's third-quarter DCF was 1.8 times its dividends for the quarter.
Looking ahead, Kinder Morgan intends to raise its 2021 dividends by 3%. Though lower than what the company has long been promising, the modest increase looks like a sound strategy, considering the stock's already high yield as well as weak market conditions. Kinder Morgan can use the extra cash to reduce its debt load or repurchase shares. The stock is down 32% so far in 2020 and offers a generous yield of more than 7%.
With 25 consecutive years of dividend growth, Enbridge (NYSE:ENB) is easily any dividend investor's dream stock. The company expects to continue this streak with a 3% dividend hike in 2021. Enbridge's diversified operations with fee-based cash flows set it up it well for consistent growth. Despite the negative impacts of the pandemic, Enbridge expects to meet its 2020 DCF guidance.

EPD DIVIDEND YIELD DATA BY YCHARTS
Enbridge expects to grow its DCF by 5% to 7% through 2022, thanks to its recently completed and upcoming growth projects. The stock's 16% fall year to date offers a great entry point for long-term dividend investors. It's trading at a yield of more than 7%.
An unfavorable refining market environment has pressured prices of refining stocks significantly this year. Valero Energy (NYSE:VLO) stock has fallen nearly 40% from its price at the start of 2020. It offers an attractive yield of nearly 7%.
One key factor that sets Valero apart from its peers is its lower cash operating expenses per throughput barrel. If refining margins remain squeezed for much longer, there is a possibility that other refiners will need to shutter higher-cost facilities. However, Valero's lower operating costs better position it to weather the tough market conditions.
Moreover, Valero's renewable diesel operations could potentially be a significant growth avenue for the refiner. The demand for renewable diesel continues to rise with a greater governmental thrust toward renewable energy.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


