The Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI
) finished Monday on a positive note, regaining their highs of the day and closing up 146 points, or nearly 1%. The Dow moved higher initially after positive reports of retail-sales growth in the U.S. economy, and just when it appeared that the average might give up all of its gains in the final hour of trading, the Dow bounced back and jumped more than 100 points in 45 minutes to finish near its highs of the day. Contributing to the gains were ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
) and Chevron (NYSE:CVX
), both of which rose more than 1% in showing the continued importance of oil and gas exploration and production to the economy as a whole.
Looking at the fundamentals
At their most basic level, ExxonMobil and Chevron profit when oil and natural gas prices rise. Today, oil futures markets cooperated, with May crude rising $0.31 per barrel to climb above the $104 level and contracts further in the future rising by even larger amounts. Natural gas, on the other hand, edged down $0.06 to $4.56, as winter weather finally starts to wind down and give way to what has traditionally been a weaker season for the clean-burning fuel.
But the energy revolution in the U.S. has had ripple effects around the world, and Chevron and ExxonMobil have found themselves at the center of the resulting boom. Obviously, neither of the two massive oil giants can have their needles move nearly as easily as a small exploration and production company like Goodrich Petroleum, whose shares soared 30% Monday after announcing a solid hit on its bet in the Tuscaloosa Marine Shale play in the Mississippi Delta region. But given just how widespread discoveries like that have been, both in the U.S. and around the world, it takes a company the size of Exxon or Chevron to take full advantage of the scope of the energy boom going on worldwide.
SOURCE: CHEVRON.
Skeptics point out that it will be next to impossible for ExxonMobil or Chevron to sustain significant production growth over the long run. In order to overcome the natural decline of existing wells, the two companies would have to make massive acquisitions at what would likely be increasingly expensive prices. In many ways, shareholders might be better off if Chevron and ExxonMobil admit the upper limit of their size and work on maximizing the value of their depreciating assets. That won't stop the two companies from working on potential growth initiatives like Chevron's solar projects, but it does mean that investors don't fear them as much as they would other, less steward-like companies.
With the broader stock market on somewhat shaky ground, though, ExxonMobil and Chevron have the virtue of stability and consistent income, with shareholder capital returned through healthy dividends and huge buybacks. For those who fear corporate management teams that could fritter away billions in free cash flow, both Chevron and ExxonMobil have the discipline to act prudently. That's more than enough for many frightened investors right now, and if the energy boom continues, it could also lead to further gains for the two energy giants and their share prices.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


In May, I announced my intention to create a portfolio that embodied life's basic needs. To that end, over a period of 10 weeks, I detailed 10 diverse companies that I think will outperform the broad-based S&P 500 over a three-year period because of their ability to outperform in both bull markets and bear markets, as well as their incredible pricing power in nearly any economic environment.
If you'd like a closer look at my reasoning behind each selection, just click on any, or all, of the following portfolio components:
Let's look at how our portfolio of basic-needs stocks has fared since we began this experiment.
Company
Cost Basis
Shares
Total Value
Return
Waste Management
$42.60
23.24
$954.23
(3.6%)
Intel 
$23.22
42.64
$1,116.32
12.7%
NextEra Energy
$87.94
11.26
$1,071.39
8.2%
MasterCard
$64.557
15.30
$1,050.80
6.4%
Chevron
$124.95
7.93
$928.05
(6.3%)
Select Medical
$8.96
110.49
$1,494.93
51%
Ford
$17.50
56.57
$884.19
(10.7%)
American Water Works
$43.13
22.96
$1,044.68
5.5%
Procter & Gamble
$81.29
12.18
$983.66
(0.7%)
AvalonBay Communities
$133.95
7.39
$977.33
(1.3%)
Cash
$0.88
Dividends receivable
$198.74
Total commission
($100.00)
Original Investment
$10,000.00
Total portfolio value
$10,705.20
7.1%
S&P 500 performance
6.2%
Performance relative to S&P 500
0.9%
SOURCE: YAHOO! FINANCE, AUTHOR'S CALCULATIONS.
It was an incredibly strong week for the Basic Needs portfolio, with the broad market getting hammered but the portfolio losing just 0.1%. The end result is the very first outperformance of the Basic Needs portfolio compared to the S&P 500 since I began this experiment in early August. Of course, it's important to remember that this portfolio isn't designed to "beat" the S&P 500 on a week-to-week basis, but to instead use the steady cash flow and healthy dividends of these companies to outperform the index over a longer time period. To that end, everything appears to be right on track!
Let's take a look at some of the most pertinent news-driven events this week.
Show me the money
It was perhaps the worst performer this week, but payment processing facilitator MasterCard (NYSE:MA
) went ex-dividend this past week in anticipation of paying out $0.11 per share on May 9. MasterCard's dividend yield is the weakest in this portfolio, but it also holds the greatest promise for growth with what I suspect could be a multidecade double-digit foreign growth opportunity. A majority of transactions around the globe are still conducted in cash, leaving plenty of opportunity for MasterCard and its rivals to expand. Considering that it has generated more than $4 billion in operating cash flow over the trailing 12 months, and that its payout ratio is a mere 14% of projected 2014 earnings per share, I'd consider this dividend on the up and up.
Perfect timing
Hospital and outpatient facility operator Select Medical (NYSE:SEM
), which finds itself on the other end of the spectrum as this portfolio's top performer (and by a long shot), last Monday received an upgrade from research firm RBC Capital to outperform from sector perform. RBC also boosted its price target to $21 from $9, implying potential upside of 67% based on the April 4 close prior to the upgrade. Select Medical has for years instituted cost cuts that are finally starting to translate into positives for the company's bottom line. The real catalyst, however, is Obamacare, where health-insurance enrollment surged dramatically in March by roughly 3.3 million people. More enrollments likely mean fewer uninsured Americans, which could result in Select Medical writing off less revenue as uncollectable because of uninsured and underinsured patients receiving treatment. In turn, this could mean beefier profits and potentially even a bigger dividend.
Hitting the high gear
Automaker Ford (NYSE:F
) continued to show that it's a well-oiled machine this past Tuesday when it reported that total unit sales in China in March crossed the 100,000 monthly mark for the first time. Sales last month rose 28% from the prior year, with quarterly sales up 45%. As a company press release noted, Ford-branded car sales jumped 35% last month. The combination of improved efficiency, sleek styling, competitive pricing, and the introduction of more than a dozen new vehicles over a multiyear stretch in China is fueling Ford's profit growth. At this pace, it's quite possible that Ford could garner 10% market share in China within the next five years.
Going to the cats and dogs
In a move bound to get plenty of barks and purrs of approval, consumer goods giant Procter & Gamble (NYSE:PG
) on Wednesday announced that it was selling a significant portion of its pet food business to Mars Inc., for $2.9 billion in cash. The deal will include the Iams, Eukanuba, and Natura brands in major markets and will expand Mars' already impressive portfolio of pet foods including Pedigree, Whiskas, Banfield, and Royal Canin. As Procter & Gamble CEO A.G. Lafley noted in a press release, "Exiting Pet Care is an important step in our strategy to focus P&G's portfolio on the core businesses where we can create the most value for consumers and shareowners." Lafley was brought back to the CEO role in 2013 after a four-year absence to refocus P&G, and it looks as if he's wasting no time in those efforts. I like what I'm seeing of late, and so should shareholders.
The buddy system
Finally, integrated oil and gas giant Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) announced on Thursday that its subsidiaries had signed agreements worth $1.6 billion with YPF in Argentina to continue the development of the Vaca Muerta shale formation. Under the terms of the agreement, the two companies will explore the 49,400-acre Narambuena area for recoverable oil and gas. This deal also signals Chevron's commitment to boosting production abroad where it sees collaborative opportunities aplenty.
On Wednesday Chevron also issued an interim update for its first-quarter results, noting that oil and gas production would slip from its already weak fourth-quarter report. Chevron said it anticipates first-quarter earnings "similar" to the fourth quarter without charges, implying something in the neighborhood of $2.57 in earnings per share. By comparison, Wall Street was looking for $2.74 in EPS. While this is not the best news, considering that oil prices are rising and Chevron remains one of the few vertically integrated oil and gas companies with diverse assets and monstrous cash flow, I wouldn't be too concerned.



Before you consider The Procter & Gamble Company, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and The Procter & Gamble Company wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Berkshire Hathaway's portfolio consists of 43 companies and is worth $92 billion. In 2013, the company purchased nearly 1% of ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
). This represents about 3.5% of Berkshire's overall holdings and about 50% of its investments in the energy sector. With a move this big investors might ask if they should consider purchasing Exxon themselves. This article will explore the potential reasons for Berkshire's investment in Exxon and explain why Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) makes a better long-term investment. 
ExxonMobil and Chevron are America's two largest oil companies. They are very well diversified across the upstream and downstream segments, as well as internationally. Chevron also owns substantial refining capacity, while Exxon has a large position in chemical manufacturing (such as automotive oils). In addition, both companies have extensive retail exposure with their branded gas stations. 
They are fundamentally great long-term investments for several reasons.
The case for Exxon
Exxon is a master of reserve replacement with over 20 consecutive years of finding more oil than it produces. Thanks to 2013's 103% reserve replacement rate the company now has 25.2 billion barrels of proven reserves. This is sufficient to cover its annual production (4 million barrels per day, or bpd) for nearly 14 years. 
On the production expansion front, the company is pursing over 120 projects to produce a total of 24 billion barrels of oil. Twenty-four of these projects are scheduled to come online by 2017, including 10 in 2014 (2014's projects will increase daily production capacity by 300,000 bpd). 
The company spent $42.5 billion on capital expenditures, or capex, in 2013, is guiding for $39.8 billion in 2014, and under $37 billion in 2015-2017. 
Despite the decreasing investments, management is guiding for flat production growth in 2014 and 4% increased oil production in 2015-2017 (gas increases of 1%). The increased production and lower costs will result in margin growth on (already) above industry average profitability. 
Adding the fundamental strengths just mentioned to Exxon's investing history makes a good case for owning the stock. In the last 21 years Exxon has returned 12.5% CAGR (with dividend reinvestment), compared to the market's 9.5%. The company is a dividend aristocrat with 31 consecutive years of payout increases (dividend growth of 6.11% CAGR for the last 20 years).  
As a final cherry on top, the company is trading at an 18% discount to its historical valuation (21-year average P/E of 15 versus 12.3 today). On a yield basis, Exxon is now the cheapest it has been in three years. 
All of this makes a strong case for owning Exxon shares, except for one problem: Chevron is as strong of a company and a better relative investment. 
Why Chevron is better
SOURCE: MORNINGSTAR.
As seen above, Chevron, despite being just as safe and diversified an oil giant, outperforms Exxon in the areas investors care about most: earnings growth, profitability, yield, and dividend growth.
Chevron is also a dividend aristocrat with 25 years of consecutive dividend increases. 
However, the largest reason for investors to choose Chevron over Exxon is the company's near-term growth prospects. 
Over the next four years, Chevron plans to increase its capacity by 20%, from 2.6 mboe/d to 3.1 mboe/d. It plans to maintain its 2014 capex rate of $35.8 billion through this time, and to spend the funds on deepwater offshore drilling, shale oil, and the Tengizchevroil consortium. This last project is a partnership of companies developing the Tengiz super-giant oil field in Kazakhstan. Chevron owns 50% of the consortium. 
The increased production, when combined with flat capex, will likely result in dividend growth accelerating to about 9% annually over the next five years.

SOURCE: YCHARTS
As seen in the above chart, both Chevron and Exxon are trading at their highest yields since 2011. Given the massive size and scope of their businesses, investors can be assured that neither company's survival is ever likely to be threatened. This makes either company a good "buy and hold forever" investment. 
Chevron's recent price weakness is a result of an earnings warning issued by the company. Poor weather in the U.S., Canada, and Kazakhstan during the fourth quarter, along with increased refinery maintenance and foreign currency effects, will cause the company to miss earnings by about $0.2 per share. 
Investors can use this short-sighted market overreaction to accumulate undervalued shares and lock in a historically high yield with probable strong dividend growth in the years to come. 
Foolish takeaway
ExxonMobil is a terrific company, and investors are likely to do well owning its shares over the long term (especially given how undervalued it is). However, due to its higher yield, faster dividend growth, and better short- to medium-term growth prospects (as well as higher profitability and equal undervaluation), I believe Chevron is a better long-term investment. 


Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


