ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP
) has discovered another oil play in the Gulf of Mexico. The company announced that one of its exploration wells, the Coronado, had found roughly 400 feet of net pay. This occurred after the well drilled to a depth of nearly 32,000 feet.
ConocoPhillips has a 35% working interest in the well. Its co-owners include Chevron(NYSE:CVX
), with a 40% stake, and a unit of Andarko(NYSE:APC
).
The Coronado is situated around 190 miles off the coast of Louisiana. It is also roughly 12 miles distant from the Shenandoah, another well that was responsible for the firm's previous discovery. This find, announced on March 19, comprises approximately 1,000 feet of net pay in what ConocoPhillips described as "high-quality Lower Tertiary-aged reservoirs."
The company has a 30% stake in the Shenandoah well.



Before you consider ConocoPhillips, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and ConocoPhillips wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



Oil giant Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) struck gold -- black gold -- in the Gulf of Mexico, the company announced today.
At the company's deepwater Walker Ridge Block 98 property, located 190 miles off the Louisiana coast in 6,127 feet of water, Well No. 1 struck oil at a depth of 31,866 feet. Chevron says it encountered "more than 400 feet of net pay." (Net pay refers to how much rock was drilled through that contains hydrocarbons that can be profitably extracted.)
Chevron is still evaluating the wellhead in question, located in an area described as the "Coronado prospect," and the company says it needs to do more work to determine just how valuable of a find this is. In any case, it will be valuable to more companies than just Chevron. While the company owns a 40% interest in the prospect and is the project operator there, Chevron shares ownership of the property with ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP
), Anadarko Petroleum (NYSE:APC
), and Venari Offshore -- which own shares of 35%, 15%, and 10%, respectively.
Deepwater gusher or no, investors deep-sixed Chevron stock in Monday trading, sending it down 0.8% to close at $120.18 per share.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



