The following video is part of our "Motley Fool Conversations" series, in which analyst John Reeves and advisor David Meier discuss topics across the investing world.
Over the next couple of weeks, John and David will be revisiting some calls they made on individual stocks of the Dow. Today, they're checking out Chevron. This company is up just 2% in 2012 compared with a roughly 5% gain for the Dow average as a whole.
John and David gave Chevron an outperform call earlier in 2012, thinking it would beat the market over the next five years. So far, that's been the case. The company has been performing relatively well, even as oil and gas prices have fluctuated. Like competitor ExxonMobil, Chevron is well-managed and has a nice group of global energy properties, despite competition from smaller firms like SandRidge Energy. David also likes its venture arm, which invests in new energy technologies, such as Solazyme's biofuel efforts. All in all, David and John are sticking with their outperform call on Chevron. They think the company is built to last, and its 3.3% dividend yield is attractive.
Chevron is one of the highest-yielding stocks in the Dow. If you'd like to learn about some additional top income payers, The Motley Fool has compiled a special free report outlining our nine outstanding, dependable dividend-paying stocks. It's called  "Secure Your Future With 9 Rock-Solid Dividend Stocks." You can access your complimentary copy today at no cost! Just click here to discover the winners we've picked.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



