The following video is from Tuesday's Market Foolery, in which host Chris Hill and Motley Fool analysts Mike Olsen and David Hanson give their Foolish take on the biggest investing stories of the day.
Apple delivered a beat on earnings as well as on revenue, and iPhone sales are up 26% year over year from fourth-quarter results in 2012, but the stock was flat on the news. Is Apple stock doomed to lag the market indefinitely? In the lead story on today's Market Foolery, the guys discuss why shares didn't pop after this earnings report, and what it means that Apple is starting to look like Microsoft did a few years ago.
Then, a close look at why BP popped today. Shares of BP hit a 52-week high after Q3 earnings results came in. The company saw profits fall off 34% but is increasing its dividend. The guys discuss why the market is reacting the way it is to BP, what they think of the stock, and how it compares with some of the other big players in the energy space.
And finally, McDonald's is dropping Heinz ketchup, after Bernardo Hees took over as Heinz's CEO; Hees was formerly CEO of Burger King Worldwide. The guys discuss McDonald's relationship with Heinz, and why the move reminds them of a child throwing a tantrum.



Before you consider Microsoft Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Microsoft Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


It was a strange day on Wall Street, to say the least. The Nasdaq Composite and Nasdaq 100 were shut down for nearly an hour because of a data-feed issue, but investors charged forward as if nothing happened. The Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI
) has been higher since the open, and as of 3:15 p.m. EDT the index is up 0.57%, led by strong earnings reports from Pfizer and IBM. 
On the energy side of the index, Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) and ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
) are up 0.3% and 0.5%, respectively, despite a 0.5% slide in oil. One of the reasons is a stronger-than-expected earnings report from BP (NYSE:BP
), which may be a sign of what's to come from the Dow's oil giants.
BP's net income fell 34% in the third quarter to $3.5 billion, or $1.01 per share. Adjusting for one-time items, the company earned $3.7 billion, which was above the $3.4 billion analysts expected -- and that's why investors are excited today.  
An earnings beat is often good news but I think it's important to keep in mind the macro trends Big Oil companies are facing right now. BP's oil production fell 2.3% from a year ago; this is partly due to asset sales, but production is definitely not growing at a rapid rate. Chevron said earlier this month that oil production was down to 449,000 barrels per day from 455,000 a quarter ago. ExxonMobil's production was down slightly in its second quarter and I wouldn't expect a big production jump for the third quarter.
On a macro level, crude-oil prices are being hurt by an increase in inventory, which means even more supply may be bad for Big Oil. Stockpiles rose 2.35 million barrels last week to 382.1 million barrels, which is pushing oil lower today. This isn't a new trend, either. As you can see below, oil consumption has been falling in the U.S., which is big news considering that 21% of the world's oil is consumed here.

US OIL CONSUMPTION DATA BY YCHARTS.
BP may have surprised investors on the upside today, and Chevron and ExxonMobil may do so later this week, but keep an eye on the trends for all three companies. Oil production is flat to declining, and high oil prices are squeezing refining margins. That points to lower earnings, something I don't see turning around anytime soon.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


