It's been a rough ride for stocks of late. Several Dow components have lost billions in market cap since the beginning of August alone. Are these bargains to pursue or traps to avoid? I answer this question below with respect to the three worst performers in the Dow this month.
The three worst-performing Dow stocks in August
Two of the three worst performers in the Dow are oil companies -- ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
) and Chevron (NYSE:CVX
), which have lost 10.5% and 14.1% this month, respectively. The sector got hit with the double whammy of the overall market weakness and the fact that oil prices are at multi-year lows.
The biggest Dow loser, the Walt Disney Company (NYSE:DIS
) may be a bit more unexpected, and has given up more than 19% of its value this month. Disney's second-quarter revenue came in below expectations, so the stock was already on a downward trajectory when the recent sell-off began.

Time to buy big oil?
If you're a long-term investor, you shouldn't really care about temporary issues. Sure oil prices are low now, but how will it affect ExxonMobil and Chevron over the long run? Along similar lines, is Disney's revenue miss a temporary speed bump, or a sign of trouble to come?
PHOTO: ILDAR SAGDEJEV
From a long-term perspective, I think that ExxonMobil and Chevron are tremendous bargains right now. Obviously, revenue and profitability will lag until oil prices rise, but that isn't permanent.
Chevron will be just fine in the long-term, with more than $12 billion in cash on hand, and profits still rolling in even with oil prices as low as they are. And, ExxonMobil has an extremely diversified business, with substantial exposure to the refining and chemicals business -- which actually do better when oil prices take a dive. Chevron has this kind of exposure as well, but not to the extent of ExxonMobil, which could partially explain the additional drop in the share price.
Exxon's production is actually increasing, up 3.6% from last year, and Chevron's increased by an even more impressive 9%. Now, this isn't necessarily a good thing for the companies while oil is so cheap, but it could amplify the effects of an eventual rebound in oil prices.
Finally, both of these oil giants are actually in a position to benefit in the long run from the oil industry's pain. When a sector is hit hard by a major negative catalyst (like low oil prices), smaller companies begin to struggle to remain solvent, leaving the large, stronger companies to pick up the pieces. I already mentioned Chevron's $12 billion in cash, and Exxon has virtually unlimited access to cheap money with its AAA credit rating. During the financial crisis, the strongest companies were able to acquire their weaker rivals for pennies on the dollar, such as how Wells Fargo scooped up Wachovia. The same logic applies here, and I'd be surprised if both of these companies didn't do some "shopping" in the near future.
SOURCE: WIKIPEDIA USER JROBERTIKO
Diversity and pricing power
Walt Disney is also a solid long-term investment, but for different reasons. First, the company's brand name is without comparison, giving it tremendous appeal and pricing power in its theme park, film, and merchandising businesses. People will pay more for a "Disney" product, giving the company higher margins than companies with similar businesses -- and therefore more room to absorb adverse conditions. Plus, the Disney brand is only the tip of the iceberg. The company also owns franchises such as:
Secondly, Disney's revenue stream is diverse. If a recession hits and attendance at its theme parks slows down, the company's TV networks and film studios can help pick up the slack.
Finally, Disney is investing considerable resources into expanding its global presence with the planned opening of Shanghai Disneyland next year, and is actively seeking ways to improve its existing parks. Although there are some short-term negatives (like the fears of the company's TV networks losing subscribers), Disney's strength and diversity will allow it to thrive for decades to come.
Don't forget about dividends
It's also worth noting that when stock prices drop, dividend yields grow. I realize that Disney's 1.3% yield is not exciting, but it's historically high for Disney. And, Exxon and Chevron are paying 4.1% and 5.8%, respectively, at the current share prices -- their highest yields since the 1990's. So, while the short-term may be bumpy, at least you'll be paid well to wait.
The takeaway
Just because a stock has dropped considerably doesn't make it cheap. And, the markets could certainly get worse before they get better, so don't use a correction as an excuse to scoop up shares of just any company simply because prices are lower.
However, by focusing on rock-solid companies like the ones mentioned here that should stand the test of time. All three stocks here have competitive advantages on their side. ExxonMobil and Chevron both have their size and credit ratings which should help them capitalize on weakness in oil prices, and Disney's brand name gives it tremendous pricing power while its diverse business structure means it's not vulnerable to any specific weakness.
This is by no means an exhaustive list of the companies that are great values right now; it's instead merely three great examples of long term winners trading at a discount. When you have the opportunity to find and buy long-term winners at a good price, that's exactly what you should do.



Before you consider The Walt Disney Company, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and The Walt Disney Company wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


The year 2015 has been a slow one on the stock market despite the continuation of low interest rates and a steadily improving economy. It's times like these when investors really appreciate stable, dividend-paying companies that, in markets both good and bad, consistently churn out cash for their shareholders. Not only can these companies provide steady income for shareholders, but they can also produce huge capital gains over the long term, as dividend stocks have historically outperformed the market by a wide margin.
With that in mind, here are four rock-solid dividend-paying stocks that look attractive today.
Verizon
Much has been made of increasing competition in the wireless business, but the fact remains that Verizon (NYSE:VZ
) is the most profitable company in the space -- a position that doesn't appear to be in danger for the foreseeable future. Its whopping 4.8% dividend yield should even grow as more people spend more on wireless technology and Verizon moves into distributing video content of its own. The acquisition of AOL adds video advertising that reaches half of U.S. households, and an Internet TV service is reportedly in the works.  
There's also an ingrained advantage in the core wireless business. It costs tens of billions of dollars to build out networks. Then it takes years to acquire the tens of millions of customers who will generate a return from that network. If a company attracts them with low prices, as T-Mobile and Sprint are trying to do, it will have a hard time making the profits necessary to invest in the next generation of wireless technology, creating a low-profit cycle that's difficult to escape.
Verizon Wireless commands a higher price for better service, making more money for investors and giving the company the cash it needs to invest in the next-generation network. The company's subscriber base may not grow as quickly as those of its competitors, but Verizon Wireless is willing to give up low-margin customers in order to maintain its profits and its payouts to shareholders. It's a business model that's built to last, because consumption of data from wireless companies is only increasing, and millions of people are willing to pay for it month after month.
Intel
Another forgotten business in today's market is chips, and that's Intel's (NASDAQ:INTC
) specialty. Cloud and wireless devices get a lot of attention, but chips make this computing revolution possible, and Intel is still at the forefront of that business. With a P/E ratio of just 12.3 and a dividend yield of 3.4%, Intel is an attractive option for investors looking for yield.
Intel missed the boat on mobile products, but it's now leading the way in chips for cloud servers and Internet of Things-connected devices. Like Verizon, it's no longer a growth engine, but it continues to generate billions in cash and net income year after year. This market is not putting much value on the bottom-line fundamentals that make this a great value for investors.

Chevron
Low oil prices are bad news for the energy industry, but they're not debilitating for companies with diverse portfolios, like Chevron (NYSE:CVX
). The company is still making massive profits on refining and distributing energy, even with oil prices now bouncing near $50 per barrel. Investors are getting a giant in the industry at 9.3 times earnings, and it pays a 4.7% dividend yield.
Even if energy earnings get worse overall, there could be an opportunity for Chevron. Major oil companies will likely become consolidators if shale and offshore drillers go bust in the next few years, and Chevron could be an opportunistic buyer.
Especially here in the U.S., energy consumption is starting to rise. Long term, that bodes well for a diversified company like Chevron. Getting in at today's price could prove to be a steal years down the road.
Apple
It seems like every few months, Apple (NASDAQ:AAPL
) goes in and out of favor with the market. iPhone sales miss estimates, then they beat estimates. Then the stock falls into deep-value territory, the stock rises to a new all-time high, and the cycle repeats.
What can't be denied about Apple is that it's a cash-generating machine, and it's starting to reward shareholders in a big way through dividends and share buybacks.

Apple's dividend is already at a 1.7% yield, but its payout ratio of just 24% means it has lots of room to increase that dividend in the future. With a business few companies in the world could disrupt, Apple looks like one of the most stable dividend stocks on the market today. 
Dividends can deliver market-crushing returns
Companies like Verizon, Intel, Chevron, and Apple may not be the growth machines that Wall Street loves today, but they have stable businesses that generate billions of dollars in cash for investors each year. And in the long term, these dividend stocks have a high chance of beating the market, and that's what every investor wants.
In my opinion, Wall Street has overlooked these stocks, and their incredible streaks of profitability and dividend payments shouldn't be overlooked by investors today.



Before you consider Apple Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Apple Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


