Shares of integrated energy giant ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) have nosedived in 2020 as oil prices have plunged to historic lows. With the stock set to be booted from the Dow 30, is this the end of an era, or an investing opportunity for those willing to step in while others are fearful? Here's a look at some of the key risks to understand before making a final call on this oil company.  
Let's get the biggest potential risk out of the way up front: An Exxon bankruptcy is highly unlikely in the near term. As it stands, the company has one of the strongest balance sheets of its integrated peers. Exxon's debt-to-equity ratio is roughly 0.38 times. Although Chevron's (NYSE:CVX) 0.25 times is lower, all of the European players have much higher debt-to-equity ratios. At the top end is BP at around 1.1 times. The truth is that 0.38 times is actually a fairly reasonable number, leaving Exxon with ample room on its balance sheet to handle more adversity.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Bankruptcy, however, is the worst-case scenario. There are a lot of things besides Exxon going belly up that can go wrong for investors. 
Exxon has increased its dividend for over three decades. During Exxon's second-quarter earnings conference call management again reiterated the importance of returning value to shareholders via a stable and growing dividend. However, major energy industry peers like BP and Royal Dutch Shell have both slashed their dividends at this point, and it's hardly unreasonable for investors to think Exxon could end up following that trend. In fact, at this point, the company's commitment to the dividend is really the only thing keeping it at its current level. Exxon's cash flow isn't sufficient to cover its dividend payments right now. 
Which brings the balance sheet back into play. Exxon's debt-to-equity ratio started the year at around 0.24 times. As oil prices and demand fell in the face of COVID-19-related economic shut downs, the company added debt to cover its material capital investment plans and the dividend. This is par for the course -- the oil space is highly cyclical and Exxon has used this tactic before. But there's a fly in the ointment. During the second-quarter conference call, management also hinted that it was unlikely to issue more debt. That limits the places where Exxon can find additional cash if it needs it. One easy way to free up capital is to cut the dividend, which costs Exxon around $3.7 billion a quarter and nearly $15 billion a year.   
The dividend is likely safe for at least the rest of 2020. But after that point there's materially more uncertainty. If oil prices remain moribund, a dividend cut is not out of the question.
As noted, Exxon is currently in the middle of a large capital investment program driven by weak production numbers in the past few years. There's a bigger takeaway here, in that Exxon is basically doubling down on oil at a time when peers, like Shell and France's Total (NYSE:TOT) have been pivoting toward electricity. The logic of that shift is pretty simple: Carbon-based fuels are being replaced by cleaner options, impacting everything from transportation to utility-level electricity generation. Exxon, however, has stressed that energy transitions have historically taken a long time and that oil will remain an important energy source for decades to come. This take is backed up by the International Energy Agency's long-term outlook -- even in a scenario where carbon emission reductions are a global focus.  

XOM DATA BY YCHARTS
And yet oil prices literally fell to zero in the early part of 2020, hinting that things aren't right in the energy space. The fact that oil drillers, for a brief moment, were paying customers to take their oil is frightening. However, prices are back up to the $40 per barrel space, suggesting that the near-term demise of oil is greatly exaggerated. As a commodity, oil is subject to supply and demand, with the current low prices (driven by COVID-19 demand dislocations) causing a material shakeout in the industry. Many exploration and production companies, especially in the U.S. onshore space, have filed for bankruptcy. Eventually, though it might be painful, supply and demand are likely to balance out again. Financially strong Exxon will be positioned to benefit when that happens. For investors who are bearish on oil, however, Exxon's decision to redouble its efforts on black gold should be very worrisome. 
There are some very material risks to consider when looking at Exxon and they are hard to quantify. While it is unlikely that Exxon is going to go out of business anytime soon, lingering low energy prices could lead to a dividend cut. And the oil space, which is what drives the company's top and bottom lines, is clearly in flux today. Exxon, once a stock appropriate for conservative investors, doesn't have quite the same risk profile as it did just a few years ago. If you are looking at the company's hefty 8% yield, you will want to think carefully before jumping aboard this name today. You might be better off with Chevron, which is on stronger financial footing, or Total, which is diversifying its business by adding electricity assets to its portfolio. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


When Chevron (NYSE:CVX) declared its 33rd straight year of quarterly dividend raises in January, it didn't know that a pandemic would collapse the world into a recession. Yet instead of cutting its dividend like other oil majors, Chevron has reaffirmed that its "financial priorities remain unchanged." 
Chevron yields three times the market average. And with its shares down close to 30% this year, there could be even more room for upside. Let's dive in to see if the company is a buy, or its dividend and downtrodden share price are too good to be true.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Chevron's suspension of share buybacks, $3 billion second-quarter adjusted loss, and over 50% decrease in sales and operating revenue are reasons to be concerned about the company. However, Chevron introduced a stress test that concludes it will maintain its industry-leading balance sheet and be able to afford its dividend at $30 Brent crude oil from 2020 to 2021. The stress test factors in Chevron's recent assets sales, increased liquidity, and 40% reduction in 2020 capital expenditures. 
Chevron introduced the stress test during its first-quarter call in early May. Since then, Chevron has reaffirmed the resilience of its dividend through $30 Brent oil and reports that its business is showing signs of improvement in the third quarter. "Things are definitely better than they were in the second quarter, in particular, in that April-May time frame," said Chevron CFO, Pierre Breber. 
April 2020 and May 2020 were the first months that averaged below a $30 Brent price since December of 2003, providing a context of just how severe COVID-19 has impacted oil prices. 
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
Average Europe Brent Spot Price
$63.65
$55.66
$32.01
$18.38
$29.38
$40.27
$43.24
DATA SOURCE: U.S. ENERGY INFORMATION ADMINISTRATION
With Brent prices seemingly stabilized above $40 per barrel, there's reason to be optimistic that Chevron won't have to challenge its stress test.
Chevron's success and continued focus in the prolific Permian Basin gives the company upside potential. For now, Chevron has been pressured to cut Permian spending in the second half of the year by 75% compared to the first quarter, but thanks to improved efficiencies, Chevron believes it can still be cash-flow positive in the Permian this year. 
Despite production curtailments and reduced spending, Permian production should be down just 6% or 7% in 2021. Jay Johnson, executive vice president of Upstream, said that "the near-term production profile for the Permian has changed, but our long-term view of the asset's attractiveness has not." 
Supporting that commitment is Chevron's planned acquisition of Noble Energy (NASDAQ:NBL), which will substantially increase Chevron's reserves for a low cost. The timely acquisition gives Chevron complementary acreage for added upside in the Permian. 
Chevron has repeatedly said that it understands the importance of its growing dividend to shareholders. Its stress test and positive free cash flow in the Permian, despite the challenging market, are Chevron's way of communicating to investors that its efforts during the pandemic are working. In this way, the health and reliability of Chevron's dividend are quite predictable. Barring a second wave of the pandemic that collapses oil prices again -- or a sustained collapse in prices for reasons unknown -- Chevron's dividend looks as good as gold.
It's refreshing to see transparency from one of the world's largest oil companies. Chevron's pragmatic efforts to preserve its balance sheet and mitigate risk, coupled with its upside potential, reinforce the company's reputation as one of the best oil stocks on the market.
There's no denying that exposure to oil and gas has its fair share of long-term risks. And it's true that Chevron hasn't shown the level of interest in the energy transition as other oil majors who want to turn into renewable energy stocks. However, oil and gas will likely remain an integral part of the energy mix for decades to come. Given Chevron's handling of the pandemic and track record for dividend growth, it looks to be one of the best ways to invest in oil at this time.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


