In the past several years, the U.S. has grown its oil production at the fastest rate since the 1960s, and the country was the fastest-growing oil producer in the world between 2011 and 2012. For a while, OPEC hasn't been sweating the threat of U.S. production. Only a couple months ago its leaders announced that it has no plans to change its production volumes despite the change in the global oil landscape. Well, that idea has been completely turned on its head: OPEC recently announced that it is considering a plan to cut its output ceiling by 500,000 barrels per day by the end of the year in order to keep oil prices at profitable levels for the oil cartel. 
In some ways this is a feel-good story for American energy production, but what does it actually mean for the energy space? For one thing, it is a sign that oil prices will probably remain high for a while longer, which should be a relief for companies with major exploration and development projects going on. Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) recently said that it saw a drop in production in part due to lower oil prices, so a reduction in OPEC's output could be a good sign for Chevron and its peers as they try to bring their major projects to fruition. Tune into the video below where Fool.com contributor Tyler Crowe looks deeper into why OPEC is reconsidering the surge in U.S. production, and highlights some of the companies that could benefit from this move. 



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



Earnings season has gotten off to a positive start as several strong reports from members of the Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI
) have taken the average to record-high levels. The index is up 90 points as of 2:50 p.m. EDT today. But behind the scenes, some sectors that had been lagging the overall market have started to come to the forefront, reminding value-seeking investors that the best opportunities often come from areas of the market that the crowd has recently ignored.
Lately, energy stocks have made a nice comeback. After lagging the Dow for the first half of 2013, both ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
) and Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) have started out July on the right foot, with Exxon hitting a new five-year high today and Chevron approaching its own all-time record-high share price.
The gains stem partly from overall price increases. Not only have prices climbed well above the $100-per-barrel mark, but the persistent spread between West Texas Intermediate crude prices and world-benchmark Brent crude prices has all but disappeared in the past several months. That changes many of the internal dynamics within the industry, reducing refiners' incentive to transport domestic crude through unconventional means like rail transport, rather than obtaining world-market oil via traditional tanker ships. But it also makes domestic production even more lucrative, as producers don't have to settle for lower prices when they sell their crude on the open market.
But the other side of the energy story is production, as oil giants are continually seeking out new discoveries. In the Gulf of Mexico, Chevron has had great success with discoveries off the coast of Louisiana, tapping the deepwater Coronado area to find what could be a massive undersea oilfield. Meanwhile, ExxonMobil's Hadrian discovery is one of the biggest in nearly 15 years, and the company maintains a huge leasehold presence in the Gulf as it seeks out further finds.
The last part of the equation for energy stocks is the fact that most of the distress-selling by weaker players in the industry may finally have run its course. Chesapeake Energy (OTC:CHKA.Q
), for instance, had to sell nearly $7 billion in gas and pipeline assets last fall in order to finance necessary capital expenditures on its other holdings. Chevron has done a good job of taking advantage of undervalued assets, including a portion of the Permian Basin assets that Chesapeake sold.
Going forward, even the threat of $4 gasoline doesn't seem to be having the influence it once had on the economy and energy consumption, and that bodes well for the prospects for energy stocks both within and outside the Dow. If energy starts to pull its weight, then it could help give the Dow a new leg up in its long-running bull market.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


