Dividend yields spiked during the market collapse early in the year as investors feared that COVID-19 would upend the world as we know it. While the coronavirus has led to dramatic changes, Wall Street seems to think that there is a light at the end of the tunnel. That's still an open question, so investors need to be selective with their investments. Here are three stocks that each combine scale and diversification to offer investors generous 4%-plus dividends. All of these top dividend stocks are worth closer looks right now.
Net-lease real estate investment trust (REIT) W.P. Carey (NYSE:WPC) just raised its dividend 0.2%, which seems rather anemic until you consider that scores of REITs have cut their dividends in the face of COVID-19. It's basically a show of strength for a company with a business model that's really shining today. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
The biggest example of that is that Carey was able to collect 95% of its April and May rents, while other REITs were struggling to collect any rent at all (some retail REITs collected less than 50% of their April rent). A key factor here is the company's broad diversification. The company's portfolio is broken down between industrial (24% of rents), office (23%), warehouse (22%), retail (19%), self storage (5%), and other (7%). It takes diversification a step further, however, with roughly a third of its rent roll coming from Europe. This level of diversification, combined with its size ($12 billion market cap), makes W.P. Carey a unique REIT. 
Add in the fact that W.P. Carey's tenants are responsible for most of the costs of the properties they occupy (which is what a net-lease is), and the REIT's business model looks even more attractive. With a 5.6% yield backed by 23 years worth of annual dividend increases, long-term dividend investors should like what they see here. 
Next up is Dominion Energy (NYSE:D), one of the largest utility companies in the United States. Over the past decade or so it has made a notable transition, shifting out of volatile industries like oil drilling and refocusing on regulated and fee-based businesses. Today the company is broken down into four broad segments: regulated electric utilities (55% of earnings), natural gas transmission and storage (25%), natural gas distribution (10%), and contracted power generation (5%). There's a little overlap in some of the segments, but the big takeaway is that it has multiple streams of income. Meanwhile, roughly 70% of its business is regulated at the state level, with the rest largely backed by long-term contracts. 
Regulation is a mixed blessing, because it puts a cap on Dominion's growth. However, that regulation exists because the company has been granted a monopoly in the regions it serves. The ups and downs on Wall Street are an issue for the company, but when it comes to future growth, the big driver is the capital investment plans that it works with the states it serves to create. Right now it has roughly $26 billion in investment planned between 2019 and 2023. That spending is highly likely to take place regardless of what happens in the market, with investments spread across things like utility upgrades, renewable power, and midstream pipelines. As it spends, it expands its ability to earn. 

CVX DIVIDEND YIELD DATA BY YCHARTS
Dominion's yield is a generous 4.4% today, backed by 17 years worth of annual dividend increases. Yes, demand for energy could wane in the near term because of COVID-19, but the long-term picture is still very bright here. 
The final opportunity is probably the one that will require the strongest stomach: Chevron (NYSE:CVX). The company is one of the largest and most diversified energy names on Wall Street. Demand for oil plummeted when economies around the world shut down to slow the spread of COVID-19. The supply/demand imbalance that created has pushed oil prices to historic lows, and it will take a long time to get back to some semblance of normal again. But that's presenting an opportunity for long-term dividend investors, because it has pushed Chevron's yield up to an attractive 5.5%. 
There are a couple of things to note here. First, Chevron has one of the strongest balance sheets in the oil patch, with financial debt to equity at around 0.25 times -- the lowest among its closest peers. That gives it a huge amount of leeway to muddle through tough periods, as it has done before. That's where the company's 33 consecutive years' worth of annual dividend increases comes in. Oil is highly volatile, so Chevron's ability to keep raising its payout speaks to both its shareholder commitment and its ability to navigate a highly cyclical industry. Lastly, Chevron is very clear that it thinks long-term when it makes investment decisions. That doesn't mean that it won't adjust to current market conditions, but its big goals are long-term in nature, and they don't change dramatically over time. 
To that end, the company remains committed to oil and natural gas, because even the worst case scenarios for demand show these vital fuels will be important commodities for years to come. To be fair, oil prices are so low that Chevron is struggling, just like everyone else in the energy patch. So this is a more aggressive investment. But it has a high likelihood of surviving this period in relative stride -- unlike smaller players, many of which are on the verge of bankruptcy or have already sought out court protections. If you can stomach some uncertainty, Chevron is worth a deep dive.
This trio of high-yield dividend stocks spans across a broad spectrum, but they all have something to offer for the right type of investor. If you take the time to understand W.P. Carey, Dominion Energy, and Chevron, it's highly likely that one, or more, could end up in your portfolio today. 



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Stocks that combine income and growth can sometimes be hard to find. But once you do find them, an effective strategy can be to simply buy the stock, sit back and relax, and let the investment work for you.
Here are two completely different stocks you can buy and hold forever.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Putting Chevron (NYSE:CVX)on this list may raise a few eyebrows, but the company has demonstrated the effectiveness of its prudent approach to a volatile industry. Unlike other oil and gas companies that borrow too much money, pay dividends they can't afford, or overly spend, Chevron is one of the few energy companies with a solid balance sheet and an attractive dividend.
Chevron's strategy has also proved more successful than other majors like ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) in that Chevron's superior operational efficiency and lower spending has led to a healthier company that generates more shareholder value.
Another point to mention is Chevron's savvy negotiating skills. After Occidental Petroleum (NYSE:OXY), a much smaller company, outbid Chevron for Anadarko, a company roughly the same size as Occidental, Chevron simply walked away from the deal and pocketed a $1 billion breakup fee from Anadarko. Occidental shares were sent tumbling as outraged investors criticized Occidental for chasing assets at the expense of more debt, whereas Chevron's restraint looks to be a brilliant move given the current state of the oil and gas market.
It's also worth mentioning that Chevron's debt-to-capital and debt-to-equity ratios, two key financial metrics, are the lowest of the oil majors.

CVX DEBT TO CAPITAL (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS
In late March, Chevron decided it would cut spending by 50% in the largest onshore U.S. oilfield, the Permian Basin, as well as cut total 2020 spending by 20%. Chevron also halted its $5 billion share buyback program. Such precautions help ensure that Chevron retains its financial strength while affording its dividend, which yields 5.6% at the time of this writing.
Starbucks (NASDAQ:SBUX) investors have enjoyed a fivefold increase in both dividends and in stock priceover the past ten years.
Starbucks is now a household name around the world. However, the company recently announced a grim short-term outlook for the rest of 2020 in addition to the closing of 400 stores in the U.S. and Canada over the next 18 months.
Although this news looks bad, Starbucks has a track record of making the right adjustments. It's one of the few U.S. companies that has successfully tapped into the coveted Chinese market. As of Sept. 30, 2018, China represented around 20% of Starbucks' total company-operated store count. A year later, 600 additional stores were added in China for a total of 4,123 company-operated Chinese stores. That addition brought the number of company-operated stores in China to represent over a quarter of Starbucks' total company-operated store count of 15,834. The number of company-operated stores in China is now nearly half of the 8,791 company-operated stores in the U.S. 
On June 10, Starbucks announced a major shift in business strategy as a direct response to the coronavirus pandemic. Going forward, Starbucks is focusing on increasing the convenience of grab and go ordering by leveraging its 19.4 million rewards members and mobile ordering. Even before the coronavirus pandemic, 80% of Starbucks' U.S. transactions were on the go, a trend that has only increased. 
So while the headlines could lead you to believe that Starbucks is closing stores, it's really shifting from large low-volume stores to maximizing transactions through leaner solutions with fewer costs and overhead. In the works are pilot programs for Starbucks stores that exclusively offer curbside pickup, as well as stores specifically intended for urban customers on foot to pick up their coffees and go.
The company's decision to lean into the needs of customers during the pandemic pairs nicely with the growth of mobile ordering and paying. Although the short term will be challenging for Starbucks, the company has proven it has staying power over the long term. With a 2.1% dividend yield, it pays for investors to wait as the new strategy unfolds.
There's no denying that Chevron and Starbucks are a motley duo, but both companies have a track record of navigating uncertainty well. Chevron's prudence and restraint have benefited its balance sheet and given it a significant advantage over its competitors. Starbucks' ability to take a chance on emerging markets where others have failed and admit that its business model needs a revamp are signs that the company possesses a rare balance of ambition and humility.
For these reasons, it could be worth picking up a few shares of Chevron and Starbucks and holding them over the long term.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


