Chevron (NYSE: CVX) is expected to report Q3 earnings on Oct. 9. Here's what Wall Street wants to see:
The 10-second takeaway
Comparing the upcoming quarter to the prior-year quarter, average analyst estimates predict Chevron's revenues will wither -4.9% and EPS will wither -21.7%.
The average estimate for revenue is $58.25 billion. On the bottom line, the average EPS estimate is $3.07.
Revenue details
Last quarter, Chevron reported revenue of $59.78 billion. GAAP reported sales were 10% lower than the prior-year quarter's $64.41 billion.
Source: S&P Capital IQ. Quarterly periods. Dollar amounts in millions. Non-GAAP figures may vary to maintain comparability with estimates.
EPS details
Last quarter, non-GAAP EPS came in at $3.56. GAAP EPS of $3.66 for Q2 were 4.9% lower than the prior-year quarter's $3.85 per share.
Source: S&P Capital IQ. Quarterly periods. Non-GAAP figures may vary to maintain comparability with estimates.
Recent performance
For the preceding quarter, gross margin was 30.4%, 170 basis points worse than the prior-year quarter. Operating margin was 16.5%, 50 basis points worse than the prior-year quarter. Net margin was 12.5%, 50 basis points better than the prior-year quarter.
Looking ahead
The full year's average estimate for revenue is $247.88 billion. The average EPS estimate is $12.84.
Investor sentiment
The stock has a five-star rating (out of five) at Motley Fool CAPS, with 4,031 members out of 4,195 rating the stock outperform, and 164 members rating it underperform. Among 963 CAPS All-Star picks (recommendations by the highest-ranked CAPS members), 942 give Chevron a green thumbs-up, and 21 give it a red thumbs-down.
Of Wall Street recommendations tracked by S&P Capital IQ, the average opinion on Chevron is outperform, with an average price target of $123.42.
Can your portfolio provide you with enough income to last through retirement? You'll need more than Chevron. Learn how to maximize your investment income and "Secure Your Future With 9 Rock-Solid Dividend Stocks." Click here for instant access to this free report.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



Today, Fool.com energy editors Joel South and Talor Muckerman discuss a big election in Venezuela. The country is a huge player in the energy space due to its immense oil reserves. But on Oct. 7 it will announce the outcome from its elections.
Should Hugo Chavez, the longtime leader of Venezuela, lose to his opponent, the implications for energy investors are big. The challeger, Henrique Capriles, is as pro-oil as Chavez, but is expected to be far more friendly toward the major international integrated oil companies. 
Taylor believes there are some obvious supermajor oil companies that could be expected to re-enter Venezuela if the election tips against Chavez.

While these elections could be a big win for some companies, they are far from guaranteed. Instead, we suggest betting on something more stable. Our analysts have uncovered what they're calling "The Only Energy Stock You'll Ever Need." Don't miss out on this limited-time offer and your opportunity to discover this under-the-radar company before the market does. Click here to access your report -- it's totally free.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



