Energy stocks' current rally may or may not last, but oil and gas as energy sources have robust long-term prospects. Growing global energy demand is expected to be met by a combination of renewable and conventional energy sources. Additionally, few segments, such as petrochemicals, have viable alternatives to fossil fuels yet. So, buying fundamentally strong oil and gas stocks with robust growth prospects can surely generate attractive returns in the long term. Here are three high-yield energy stocks trading near rock-bottom prices to consider buying right now.
Integrated oil and gas giant Chevron's (NYSE:CVX) stock has risen nearly 12% in 2021. Still, it is 18% off its 52-week high and 28% off its three-year high. The stock offers an attractive yield of around 5.5%.

CVX DATA BY YCHARTS
Chevron has increased its dividends for 32 consecutive years. The company can easily cover its dividends using its cash flow from operations at $55 per barrel Brent -- the international benchmark crude oil price. Much of CVX's production is outside the U.S.  While that's the price level currently, there is no guarantee that oil prices will remain near current levels. However, Chevron's resilience at lower prices differentiates it from peers.
Chevron management says it can reduce its capital expenditures, suspend share repurchases, and minimize operating costs if oil prices remain low, as was the case in 2020. These actions should allow the company to maintain its balance sheet strength and dividends even at Brent prices of around $30 per barrel. Moreover, Chevron has the strongest balance sheet among its peers. 

CVX FINANCIAL DEBT TO EQUITY (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS
As the above graph shows, Chevron's debt-to-equity and debt-to-capital ratios are the lowest among its top peers. Chevron's strong balance sheet and capital discipline positions it well for periods of low oil prices. At the same time, it allows the company to make discretionary acquisitions, such as that of Noble Energy, at attractive terms.
Low refining margins have pressured refining stock prices, including that of Valero Energy (NYSE:VLO). The stock is off 33% from its 52-week high and offers an attractive yield of nearly 6.5%. The refiner is likely to report weak fourth-quarter performance due to persistently low refining margins. That may keep the stock price under pressure in the near term.
However, Valero is one of the most well-positioned refiners to benefit from an eventual recovery in refining margins. Its refining cash operating expenses per processed barrel are among the lowest in its peer group. Additionally, Valero continues to invest in projects that improve connectivity to feedstocks as well as improve margins. This disciplined approach to investments allowed Valero to generate the highest average free cash flow among its peer group in the past. 

VLO FREE CASH FLOW (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS
Moreover, its free cash flow has been less volatile than that of its top peers. 
Finally, Valero is expanding its renewable diesel capacity significantly. With the planned expansion in 2021, the company's renewable diesel capacity will more than double from its current level. Low-carbon fuel policies in California, Canada, and the EU have driven the demand for renewable diesel. Other states are also considering similar policies, which could further boost demand. Valero's renewable diesel operations, though small currently, have generated healthy and growing cash flow over the years.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
ONEOK (NYSE:OKE) stock has risen nearly 15% so far in 2021, outperforming both Valero Energy and Chevron. Still, the stock is off 43% from its 52-week high. It also offers an alluring yield of nearly 8.5%. ONEOK stock slumped big time in 2020. A key reason was that the company's distributable cash flow (broadly EBITDA less interest, tax, and maintenance capital expenditures) slumped in the second quarter and wasn't sufficient to cover its dividend. A steep fall in oil and gas production impacted the company's gas gathering and processing earnings.
ONEOK's performance, however, improved in the third quarter supported by strong growth in natural gas liquid (NGL) volumes. The company's dividend coverage improved, too. Yet its debt level remains elevated.

OKE FINANCIAL DEBT TO EBITDA (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS
ONEOK expects double-digit earnings growth in 2021. Unless commodity prices fall to the levels seen in April last year, ONEOK should be able to achieve its anticipated earnings growth. Notably, based on its guidance midpoint, it grew earnings by around 8% even in the challenging year of 2020.
Moreover, the company expects to spend only $300 million to $400 million on growth projects annually until the production volumes rise substantially to justify an increase in expenditure. Increased earnings and reduced capital expenditure should allow ONEOK to reduce its debt over time. That should help drive its stock higher in the long term. This makes its attractive yield sustainable, too.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Oil prices were starting to strengthen as 2020 drew to a close. Still, both ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and Chevron (NYSE:CVX) were probably glad to see the year come to an end -- the improvement in oil prices came off a very low base given the pandemic headwinds the energy sector faced.
Investors looking at these U.S. energy giants today might be wondering which is better positioned to ride a recovery. Here's what you need to know. 
While the price of oil and natural gas are clearly the most important things driving top- and bottom-line performance at Exxon and Chevron, there's another issue that's increasingly taking center stage: The global push to reduce carbon emissions is leading to very public problems in the political and management realms, at least for Exxon.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The company has been the subject of a lawsuit in New York claiming that it defrauded investors by hiding climate change costs. It eventually won that case in late 2019, but the problems aren't over -- it's now being investigated by the SEC, which is looking into the way it values its assets. That's an issue that has dogged the company for a while, since it historically hasn't written down asset values as aggressively as its peers. At the same time, dissident shareholders are trying to get the company to more aggressively change the way it operates. Basically, because of its prominence in the energy industry, Exxon has a target on its back.  
Chevron isn't immune to these same threats, but it doesn't garner the same level of attention, either. Headline risk is likely to be an increasingly important issue for these oil giants, since, unlike their European peers, Exxon and Chevron haven't laid out dramatic plans for a cleaner future. But it looks like Exxon is going to take the most heat.
Part of the reason for that is Exxon's size and prominence in the sector -- it carries a market cap of around $200 billion, making it one of the largest energy companies on Earth, and has a long and storied history dating back to the 1800s and the fabled Standard Oil Company. But Chevron is hardly an industry newcomer, weighing in with a market cap of around $180 billion. Like Exxon, it has a diversified business that spans from the upstream (exploration and production) to the downstream (chemicals and refining) segments of the industry, and a global footprint. Put another way, it can stand toe-to-toe with Exxon as a company.  
That includes the dividend front, where Exxon's 37-year streak of annual increases is better, but Chevron's 33-year streak is a very close second. Meanwhile, both oil giants stress the importance of supporting their dividends, even if times are tough today. 
All in all, when you look at size, diversification, and dividend history, there's not much difference between these two companies. That said, Exxon's 7.2% dividend yield is much more generous than Chevron's 5.6% right now. 
That brings up another notable issue for Exxon, though, and explains why more conservative investors will probably prefer Chevron: capital spending. Before the pandemic downturn, Exxon was embarking on a massive capital investment program to reverse the production declines it was suffering from. This wasn't really an optional effort -- the company needed to make notable investments in production if it wanted to sustain or grow its business. It was expected to be costly and put material stress on the company's ability to keep growing its dividend. And then the coronavirus upended things, and pushed oil and natural gas prices to painful lows. 
Like just about every company in the energy sector, Exxon pulled back on spending. But the need to spend didn't go away -- the cost is just being pushed out into the future. In the meantime, production becomes an even bigger near-term concern. Chevron entered the downturn in better shape, as it was benefiting from previous spending. Its need to spend now isn't as great. This difference shows up most prominently on the two companies' balance sheets. 
DATA SOURCE: YCHARTS.
At the start of 2019 Chevron's debt to equity ratio was higher than Exxon's. By the third quarter of 2020, however, Exxon's debt to equity ratio had doubled, while Chevron's had increased by a modest 20% or so. To be fair, Exxon's ratio is a still-reasonable 0.4 times, but Chevron's finances are in much better shape given its debt to equity ratio of roughly 0.25 times. That suggests that Chevron will have an easier time muddling through the current industry malaise and sustaining its dividend. It's even inked a major acquisition, which will likely push the debt to equity ratio higher, but for a good reason: The deal will strengthen its industry position. In fact, during Chevron's third-quarter 2020 earnings conference call, management noted that its breakeven point was below $50 per barrel -- suggesting that investors don't need to worry quite as much about its dividend, since that's about where oil is today. Exxon is just not in as good a position. 
Exxon is a well run energy company and investors wouldn't be making a bad decision if they bought it. There is material recovery potential in the stock, assuming oil prices mount a sustained recovery. However, right now that looks like a big "if", and the headwinds facing the company are likely to continue for a while. More conservative dividend investors will probably be better off taking the lower yield on offer from Chevron, which looks better positioned to handle the current headwinds.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021




