ExxonMobil's (NYSE: XOM) investor presentation this year shows why investors focusing on the long term should consider the Big Daddy of energy for their portfolios.
What caught my attention was the company's long-term predictions and how it is actually gearing up to meet the demands and challenges for the next three decades. And that is precisely why I believe Exxon is a solid long-term prospect.
Here is the lowdown on Exxon's predictions and how the company intends to tackle the rise in demand:
1. Global energy demand will grow about 30% by 2040. Exxon expects to spend approximately $37 billion per year for the next five years. The company's total proved reserves stand at almost 25 billion barrels of oil equivalent. Additionally, for the last 18 consecutive years, the reserve replacement ratio was more than 100%, which means the company has replaced more reserves than it has produced. Moreover, Exxon is on the lookout for more resources. Notable among them are projects off Alaska, West Greenland, the Black Sea, Guyana, Vietnam, Tanzania, and Madagascar.
2. Natural gas is expected to lead demand with an average global annual growth rate of 1.6% -- thanks to increasing requirements of power generation. Exxon has a globally diversified portfolio of natural-gas assets. With 76 trillion cubic feet, or Tcf, of proven gas reserves under its belt, the company looks well-placed to serve the growing demand. Its acquisition of unconventional gas producer XTO Energy has been vital to its strategy and will continue to play a crucial role in the North American shale gas space.
The Dutch Slochteren field, in the center of the gigantic Groningen gas field, cannot be forgotten, either. A 50-50 joint venture with Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE: RDS-A) (NYSE: RDS-B) has already seen 1.7 Tcf of natural gas pumped out of the field since 1963. However, CEO Rex Tillerson feels that this field is capable of producing gas for another 50 years! The field is still estimated to contain another trillion cubic feet of recoverable natural gas.
In Papua New Guinea the company is currently developing a 9 Tcf reserve and a two-train processing plant that is capable of producing 6.6 million tonnes of liquefied natural gas per annum. With the Chinese, Japanese, and Taiwanese markets on its radar, production is expected to start in 2014. Additionally, it has a 25% stake in the Chevron (NYSE: CVX)-operated Gorgon LNG project in Barrow Island off Australia.
3. Demand for oil is expected to grow at an annual rate of 0.7% globally. While the projected rate of growth is less than that of natural gas, the value is quite significant in absolute terms. In 2040, oil and other liquid fuels will still remain the largest source of energy, accounting for a third of global demand. Exxon is increasing its focus on oil sands and tight oil projects. The Kearl oil sands project, operated by Imperial Oil (AMEX: IMO), is expected to start with a production rate of 110,000 barrels per day by the end of this year. ExxonMobil holds a 70% stake in Imperial. By the end of 2015, the expanded project is expected to produce 345,000 bpd. The Kearl oil sands in Canada are estimated to hold a whopping 4.6 billion barrels of recoverable bitumen resource. Additionally, Exxon is well-positioned in the liquids-rich unconventional shale plays of Bakken, Permian, and Woodford.
In Indonesia, the company is developing a 450 million-barrel resource. Expected to commence operations in 2014 with 20,000 bpd, full field capacity is expected to hit 165,000 bpd. Exxon has been awarded five such full-field contracts for engineering, procurement, and construction. The Sakhalin and Hebron projects, along with the Kara Sea project in north Siberia, are challenging; however, these Arctic reserves are very promising.
4. The Asia-Pacific region is expected to account for 58% of the overall rise in energy demand. As mentioned above, Exxon has plenty of upstream projects with the Asian markets in mind. However, an integrated oil and gas company can further take advantage of the situation by having direct presence in the end-user market with the help of its refining and marketing operations -- which is exactly what Exxon is up to. In Singapore, the company boasts its largest refinery in the world with throughput volumes of 605,000 bpd.
Asia is also expected to account for two-thirds of global chemical demand. In line with this, Exxon is expanding its chemical refining capacity at its Singapore refinery by a fantastic 2.6 million tonnes. Identifying opportunities early on seems to come naturally to Exxon.
Foolish bottom line
On the operations front, Exxon is doing an excellent job of meeting the rising demand for energy. This oil giant seems to know what it is doing. In the next article, I will discuss the company's historical stock performance, which will show you why it has huge potential going forward. Right now, all you need to do is add ExxonMobil to your personalized watchlist.
Additionally, if you like energy stocks, we've got a stock idea that could knock your socks off. Read about it right here in The Motley Fool's special free report on the energy industry and its best prospects. It's free for a limited time, so click here today.



Before you consider Royal Dutch Shell plc, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Royal Dutch Shell plc wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



Situated prominently in the Asia-Pacific, with a GDP of $1 trillion, the country of Indonesia is promoting itself as politically stable, backed by sound macroeconomic policy, and having a young demographic (50% of citizens are under the age of 30).
Although it has long relied on tourism for its economy, a new ad campaign is urging foreigners to invest.
Politically stable or no, this country's reputation for corruption lingers despite investment opportunities. If you're not ready to dive headfirst into the Pacific, dip your toes by investing in the many American companies who have expanded into the archipelago.
Hello, mermaid
When a Starbucks (NYSE: SBUX) opened in the cultural hub of one of its islands, tourists and locals alike bemoaned the death of Indonesia. But stroll through Ubud and you'll see there is still a plethora of local coffee shops. That hasn't stopped Starbucks from catering to the international crowd with a bit of local flavor. Situated next to a temple with a view of its Thursday night cultural performances, the building is designed to merge with the local environment. As of its annual report in October, the sassy siren had 109 stores on in Indonesia, more than many countries in Europe.
Polo, anyone?
You can't walk down the main drag in Kuta or Monkey Forest Road in Ubud without stumbling across a man on a horse. The official Ralph Lauren (NYSE: RL) Polo stores are as ubiquitous as scooters, leading tourists on several online forums to wonder if the shirts these stores are selling are knockoffs. (They're not.)
In 2009, Ralph Lauren Polo bought back its license from Dickson Corporation, a Hong Kong-based company. The brand is now wholly owned in Asia-Pacific (except Japan and South Korea). While the details of the Indonesian arrangement are difficult to pin down, Ralph Lauren is exploding in Asia overall, with net revenues up from $464 million in 2009 to $658 million in 2010.
It's a gas
While Chevron (NYSE: CVX) may be second in size to Exxon (NYSE: XOM), the company's commitment to cleaner energy, including its role as the leading global producer of geothermal, makes it a better bet than its rival. Chevron has a huge presence in Indonesia, both as the country's largest crude-oil producer and through the company's island-based geothermal operations. Like most oil companies, it continues to be plagued by issues relating to oil spills, most recently in Brazil, where it's currently facing a lawsuit and ongoing problems in its Latin America division.
The tide is out on this stock
When you name a company after something that means "liquid, mercurial, and quick-changing," you're asking for trouble. If you're a surfer, you know Quiksilver (NYSE: ZQK). If you're an investor, you probably don't. There's a reason for that. The board-shorts company, which also owns ROXY swimsuit brand and DC Shoes, is drowning in its debt-to-equity ratio, has a negative profit margin, and suffers an operating margin so slim it would fit into a junior swimsuit.
The stock, which opened at $25 in 1990, never rebounded from the 2008 crash. While the current $4 price tag may be tempting, your investment would be better spent on a jar of board wax.
The Foolish bottom line
While Indonesia may be promoting itself as a country with a stable government, that government has yet to fully tackle the issues that have kept investors away in the past. Simply put: The future has not yet arrived for the archipelago.
As I mentioned above, less risky than investing directly in Indonesia is adding stocks to your portfolio with a strong presence in the Asia-Pacific market. Several of these companies are listed in this special free report, "3 American Companies Set to Dominate the World," which includes the top three stocks for the emerging market. Download a copy today -- it's free for Fools.
Think I'm wrong about Indonesia? Hate the Starbucks in Ubud? Love your Quiksilver shorts? Let me know below.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



