The bond market called it quits early today (beating holiday traffic!), but not before seeing a rise in treasuries as large investors hedge their positions ahead of the long weekend. With Europe in crisis, money managers sensibly want to avoid unnecessary equity exposure in case something major happens on Monday in the international markets. However, this has led to a malaise-filled day in the markets resulting in very little movement.
With that in mind, let's take a closer look at how the major indexes are faring and drill down on a few stocks making headlines.
Index
Gain/Loss
Gain/Loss %
Intraday Value
Source: Yahoo! Finance.
All three major indexes are down, with the Nasdaq holding up the best. The Dow's sell-off is larger than one would anticipate given its roughly even split of winners and losers, but the top decliners make up some of the index's most heavily weighted companies. Chevron (NYSE: CVX) with its 6% weighting is moving the opposite direction of oil prices and the energy sector as its shares decline 1.4%, while Caterpillar (NYSE: CAT) with its 5.5% weighting is down 1.4%, despite a renewed interest in infrastructure stimulus in China.
Next week, we have a boatload of economic data, including new unemployment numbers, so expect volatility to return as May draws to a close. In the meantime, have a fun and safe holiday weekend.
And if you're looking for some compelling reading, I urge you to download our newest special free report: "These Stocks Could Skyrocket After the 2012 Presidential Election." Each candidate has their own plan for getting America back on track, and The Motley Fool will have you prepared to profit -- no matter who wins! Download your copy now, for FREE, and discover unique ways to profit from the election -- if you buy the right stocks before the next president's term begins.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



