U.S. stock markets got back to their winning ways on the back of some positive signals for the economy. U.S. import prices fell 0.5% in April, which met expectations, and the New York Federal Reserve said the amount of debt held by households fell by $110 billion, or 1%, to $11.23 trillion. If the economy is growing, household balance sheets are improving, and unemployment is falling, that's good for stocks, which is why markets are up today. As of 3:15 p.m. EDT the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI
) has gained 0.61% for the day, and the S&P 500 (SNPINDEX:^GSPC
) is up 0.85%.
Bank of America (NYSE:BAC
) is one of the Dow's leaders, climbing 2.5% after hedge fund manager David Tepper said he owns shares and has megabanks Citigroup and JPMorgan Chase in his portfolio as well. Tepper was actually bullish on all markets, making the case that Fed asset purchases and a falling federal deficit will drive stocks higher over the next six months. The reduction in household debt didn't hurt Bank of America today, either, because one of the drivers was falling mortgage debt, which was at one time a big risk for the bank.
Shares of Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) are up 1.6% despite a 1% drop in the price of oil today. Competitors BP and Statoil were raided by EU regulators over possible oil-price fixing today. Chevron hasn't been implicated yet, so that's a good sign for now. Another factor in the pop today is that Chevron's stock goes ex-dividend tomorrow, meaning that if you hold the stock after the market closes tonight, you'll receive the $1 dividend. This can cause abnormal short-term moves in stocks.
UnitedHealth Group (NYSE:UNH
) is one of just a few Dow stocks in the red Dow today, dropping 1.3%. Senators are looking into Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius' fundraising from private parties for promoting Obamacare. It may seem curious that a health insurer would drop on efforts to fight Obamacare, but one of Sebilius' endeavors was to get more people signed up for insurance, which would help UnitedHealth Group. The big upside of Obamacare for insurers is adding millions of people to their rolls, and attempts to stop enrollment efforts could have a negative impact on profits in the long term.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


The wealth-building power of compound interest will never cease to amaze me. It's a story of patience and attention to detail, where small, short-term differences add up to massive divergence over decades. And in the end, the biggest winners don't always deliver the fattest share-price returns.
Today, I'm looking at petroleum products giant Chevron (NYSE:CVX
). The stock has trounced the returns of the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI
) over the last 20 years, but reinvesting dividends along the way would have more than doubled your returns again:

CVX DATA BY YCHARTS.
The black gold still deserves its rich name. Chevron powers its generous dividends with outsize cash flows. The company's dividend boosts have left fellow Dow component and cash machine ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
) in the dust, even though Exxon's cash flows are an order of magnitude richer. Chevron hasn't suffered any massively damaging setbacks like BP 's (NYSE:BP
) Deepwater Horizon disaster, which put a damper on that company's market-crushing dividend increases. Royal Dutch Shell's (NYSE:RDS.A
) total payouts plunged when the merger of Royal Dutch and Shell was completed in 2005 -- and have stayed modest ever since.

CVX DIVIDEND DATA BY YCHARTS.
Simply put, Chevron's smooth execution is second to none, and its shareholders are enjoying the cash-based benefits. The company just implemented another 11% dividend increase, set to take effect when Chevron shares go ex-dividend on Wednesday. Buying now would get you started on a healthy dividend-reinvestment program right from the start -- and you've just seen the market-beating difference that habit can make.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


