Last week's new corporate bond issues totaling nearly $17 billion marked four consecutive weeks below $20 billion. However, just three of the biggest borrowers made up more than half the total. All of the borrowers mentioned below priced their deals before the Fed's meeting last week and the subsequent rate run-up, which probably saved them several basis points on discount pricing and or coupon rates. Here are a few of the week's highlights.
With $6.25 billion in new paper, Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) covered more than one-third of last week's new issues all by itself. The company sold tranches of three-, five-, seven-, and 10-year paper and is using the money for paying down commercial paper and general corporate purposes.
Ingersoll-Rand (NYSE:TT
) pumped out $1.55 billion spread over three issues with maturities ranging from 5.5 to 30 years. The money is being used to redeem $1.26 billion of 6% and 9.5% paper and to fund a commercial and residential security business spinoff. Even with the increase in debt face value, the debt service on the new notes will save Ingersoll-Rand about $40 million per year compared to the debt being redeemed.
Mylan (NASDAQ:MYL
) prescribed three- and five-year note issues totaling $1.15 billion. The money is being used to repay some term loans. In the press release, Mylan says it's also increasing the size of its credit facility and redeeming some 7.625% notes issues maturing in 2017. A search at FINRA turned up two of the issues with a combined $1.1 billion outstanding. When the dust settles from issuing new debt and paying off existing debt, Mylan will save more than $50 million per year in debt service.
Rite Aid (NYSE:RAD
) stocked the paper aisle with $810 million of eight-year, 6.75% notes that are being used to fund a tender offer for some 9.5% notes. The refinance will save Rite Aid about $20 million per year.
Continuing with the refinance theme, Agilent (NYSE:A
) measured out $600 million of 3.875% 10-year paper. The money goes toward redeeming $250 million of maturing notes and "general corporate purposes, including payment of costs associated with its previously announced targeted restructuring program and to repurchase outstanding shares of its common stock pursuant to its existing stock repurchase program." Unlike most recent refinance deals, this one increases Agilent's debt service costs by about $17 million per year.
Even with the increase in bond yields over the past month or so, many companies are still able to save millions with refinance deals. Only time will tell whether that continues and whether the low volume of new deals is temporary or a long-term trend.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



Five weeks ago, I outlined my plans to create a portfolio of 10 companies that all have one thing in common: They provide a basic need or deliver life's necessities. It's my contention that basic-needs companies can offer investors stability and growth throughout any market environment thanks to consistent demand, incredible pricing power, and delectable dividends. This portfolio, which I have dubbed the Basic Needs Portfolio, will be pitted against the S&P 500 over a period of three years with the expectation of outperformance for all 10 stocks. I'll be rolling out a new selection to this portfolio every week for the next five weeks.
You can review my previous four selections here:
Today, I plan to introduce the fifth of 10 selections to the Basic Needs Portfolio: Chevron (NYSE:CVX
).
How it fits with our theme
There are no magic surprises here: We need energy to provide electricity to our homes and businesses and power our cars and trucks. Chevron is a diversified oil and gas company that does everything from drilling for oil, natural gas, and natural gas liquids, to refining petroleum into everyday products such as fuel for our cars.
What we often forget is that on top of being a domestic and international juggernaut that supplies the world with much of its energy needs, petroleum has numerous other uses outside of energy. According to Ranken Energy, a 42-gallon barrel of oil makes 19.4 gallons of gasoline. The remaining petroleum is used to make some 6,000 different items, including household products like plastic containers, dishes, and candles, women's cosmetics, and even the tires on your car, just to name a few. Petroleum is an essential of life, so it only makes sense to include one of the biggest companies involved in drilling for, retrieving, and refining petroleum products in this portfolio of basic needs stocks.
The risk
The three biggest risks that integrated oil and gas companies face are political unrest in overseas markets, imprudent capital expenditures, and a global growth slowdown.
REBEL GUARD IN LIBYA, MARCH 2011. SOURCE: BRQ NETWORK, FLICKR.
