On June 16, Chevron's (NYSE:CVX
) Angola LNG plant, one of the largest liquefied natural gas processing facilities in Africa, shipped its first cargo after major delays.
Initial production of LNG at the plant, operated by Cabinda Gulf Oil, a unit of Chevron, was sold to state-owned Sonangol EP to be shipped to Brazil, according to the CEO of Angola LNG Marketing. Production at the facility, which has a capacity of 5.2 million metric tons a year, had previously been delayed due to fires, pipeline failures, and labor shortages.
"First gas at Angola LNG is an important milestone in support of our strategic plan to grow our production," said Chevron vice chairman George Kirkland in a company press release. "This project will commercialize natural gas resources in western Africa to meet growing demand in the region and internationally."
Angola LNG
The $10 billion project will collect and transport natural gas from offshore Angola to an onshore liquefaction plant on the coast near the Congo River, the company said in a statement. It has the capacity to produce 5.2 million metric tons of LNG per year, 63,000 barrels per day of natural gas liquids for export, and 125 million cubic feet of natural gas per day for domestic consumption. 
The project plans to use associated natural gas produced from existing crude oil operations, as well as new non-associated gas from other offshore fields. In addition to supporting continued offshore oil development, it is expected to help reduce natural gas flaring and greenhouse gas emissions from offshore producing areas, the company said.
Chevron is Angola LNG's biggest shareholder, commanding a 36.4% stake, followed by Sonangol, which has a 22.8% interest in the project. BP (NYSE:BP
), Total (NYSE:TOT
), and Italy's Eni account for the balance, each holding 13.6%.
Production growth
Considering that the world LNG market is projected to remain tight over the next few years, with very limited new LNG capacity expected, the first shipment of production from Angola LNG couldn't have come at a better time for Chevron.
Chevron, like most of the large integrated oil companies, has struggled to boost production. However, in the first quarter this year, the company managed to grow total oil and gas production by a relatively impressive 0.8%. Compare that to ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
), which reported a 3.5% year-over-year decline in production, and ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP
), which said production fell 3% from a year earlier.
Chevron, whose U.S. oil production came in flat year over year and international production fell 2.5% to 1.3 million barrels a day in the first quarter, would have suffered a similar fate were it not for the strength of its natural gas business, which proved to be its saving grace, delivering a 3.2% year-over-year increase in first-quarter sales.  
What's next?
Chevron plans to more aggressively direct its efforts toward LNG. Through its various LNG ventures, the company plans to boost total production by 20% through the end of 2017. In addition to its Angola LNG project, Chevron has two LNG projects in Australia, as well as a 50% interest in the proposed Kitimat LNG terminal in Canada.
With global LNG demand forecast to exceed output by the end of this decade and with demand for LNG expected to grow at an average rate of 15 million tons a year through 2025, Chevron appears to have solidified a first-mover advantage in the promising African region that should serve it well for years to come.


Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


This just in: Apple (NASDAQ:AAPL
) is a serious option for income investors. Apple stock pays a 3% dividend yield right now thanks to a combination of flagging share prices and a modest policy boost in April's quarterly check.

AAPL DIVIDEND DATA BY YCHARTS.
If Apple were a member of the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI
), how would its stock stack up against its fellow income-generators? Let's find out.
Apple would boast an above-average yield among the current 30 Dow stocks, but not by a large margin. The average Dow dividend yields 2.7%. That's just below the median yield of 2.85% offered by oil giant ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
). The iPhone maker would rank in 12th place among a hypothetical 31-member Dow.
How about ranking the Dow by dividend increases? Apple boosted its dividend by 15% with just more than a year of payout history under it's belt, which would be the eighth-most generous raise of the past year. The average one-year boost sits exactly at 15% but is heavily skewed by Cisco Systems' more than doubling of its payout policy. Remove the top and bottom boosts, as they do when counting style points in Olympic events, and the adjusted average would be just 12.9%.
So far, so good. If Apple can keep its yield north of 2.7% while raising payouts at least 13% per year, the stock will be a better dividend play than your average Dow ticker. But can Apple afford to do all that?
The average Dow member funnels roughly 48% of its free cash flow into dividend payouts. Several of them pump nearly their entire cash flows right back into shareholders' pockets. This is particularly popular in mature industries where all the easy growth was had decades ago.
Exxon is a bit of an anomaly, as the company manages to stick close to the Dow average here, dishing out 45.7% of its free cash, while the broader oil industry tends to jump around at the whim of changing petroleum prices. Fellow oil-producer Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) isn't so lucky, spending 86% of its free cash on dividend checks. The roles were the same a year earlier, though the magnitudes were different: Chevron invested 41.8% of its 2011 cash flow in dividends, while Exxon's ratio was an even lower 37%.
Apple plays in a completely different league here. Cupertino pulled in $50.9 billion in operating cash over the last four quarters and spent just $8.3 billion on capital improvements. Only 5.8% of the resulting $42.6 billion in free cash flow was directed to the brand-new dividend policy.
For some added context, fellow tech stock Cisco put 14.6% of its trailing free cash flow into dividends. If you're looking for stocks with plenty of headroom to increase their dividends, Silicon Valley would be a good place to start.
So there you have it. Assuming Apple's business doesn't fall to pieces in the next few years, the company's rich cash flows will buy Cupertino a place near every income investor's cash-loving heart. The yield is already rich, dividend increases started out on the right track, and Apple has headroom like Peter Dinklage driving an Escalade.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Do you ever get the feeling that CEOs don't give much thought to the fact that you have spent your hard earned cash on their company? Well, it certainly seems that was the case with Sandridge Energy (NYSE: SD). This past week, the company and its founder and CEO, Tom Ward, went their separate ways after the board nominated CFO James Bennett to Ward's former post. Perhaps now Ward can get together with his former running buddy, Aubrey McClendon, now that he too is no longer tied down to the CEO post at Chesapeake Energy (OTC:CHKA.Q
).
As shareholders, we're simple creatures with simple needs: Keep the business strategy simple, keep sales and income growing, don't take on too much debt, and if you have a dividend, maintain or grow that yield. Unfortunately, Sandridge wasn't able to keep to that creed; it took on lots of debt and did a considerable amount of strategy shuffling in the past year. This ultimately led to the demise of Ward.
Now that Ward has been shown the door, who could be the next CEO who will be sent packing? Tune in to the video below where Motley Fool contributor Tyler Crowe joins Fool energy analyst Joel South to discuss three CEOs that may be sitting a little uneasy right now. 



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



