To suggest that COVID-19 has upended the world as we know it would be an understatement. And dividends have been one of the notable places where things have changed, as companies cut their shareholder disbursements in the face of adversity. That shouldn't dissuade you from buying dividend stocks, but it does mean you need to be a little more picky when you add a name to your portfolio.
If you still love dividends, however, here are two stocks that you should look at today.
First up is real estate investment trust (REIT) W.P. Carey (NYSE:WPC). The landlord offers investors a generous 5.8% or so yield backed by 23 years worth of annual increases. That's basically every year since the REIT went public. In fact, it just increased its dividend again last quarter. The hike was tiny, but the symbolism was huge. After all, there have been dozens of REITs in 2020 that have cut or eliminated their dividends because of the impact of COVID-19. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
The big story here is diversification, which can be just as beneficial for a company's business as it is for your portfolio. Simply put, W.P. Carey is one of the most diversified REITs you can buy. It owns properties across the industrial (24% of rents), office (23%), warehouse (22%), retail (17%), self storage (5%), and "other" (the rest) categories. Moreover, it generates about a third of its rents from outside of North America, largely Europe. When the impact of COVID-19 resulted in many REITs collecting well below the full amount of rent they were due, W.P. Carey barely skipped a beat. At the worst of the crisis in the month of May it collected 96% of its rents. In June it collected 98%. 
But there are other factors that are important here as well. For example, Carey is a net-lease REIT, which means that its lessees are responsible for most of the costs of the properties they occupy. The REIT prefers to ink deals directly with companies looking to sell assets to raise cash -- that way it can set the lease terms, and gets a loyal tenant with a long-term rent agreement. W.P. Carey also tends to be an opportunistic investor, putting money to work where it thinks it can find the best deals. With such a broadly diversified portfolio, it can usually find someplace to be active. Today, while many REITs are reeling, it is looking to invest in the industrial and warehouse spaces, where companies that need cash to muddle through the COVID-19 pandemic may be willing to sell desirable and still-important properties.
All in all, the high-yield stock stands out from its peers. If you love dividends, you should really do a deep dive here.
Another sector that has seen a huge hit from COVID-19 is the energy space. Diversified global giants like Shell and BP have cut their dividends. But not U.S. integrated oil major Chevron (NYSE:CVX). The company's yield is roughly 5.7%, and it has increased its dividend annually for 33 consecutive years. 

SPY DIVIDEND YIELD DATA BY YCHARTS
Since Chevron's top and bottom lines are tied to the often-volatile price of oil, it has been struggling just like all of its peers. In fact, in the second quarter the oil giant lost $4.44 per share (which includes one-time items), compared to a profit of $2.28 in the same period of 2019. It is bad right now. However, Chevron knows full well that oil is a volatile and yet vital global commodity. It takes a long-term view of the energy sector's ups and downs, focusing on long-term supply and demand fundamentals, not quarterly fluctuations. It still thinks the long-term opportunity is solid despite the COVID-19-related headwinds. And management continues to back the dividend, highlighting in Chevron's second-quarter-2020 earnings conference call that sustaining and growing the dividend are two of its top priorities. 
The wonderful thing here is that Chevron has the balance sheet strength to follow through on this commitment. With a debt to equity ratio of roughly 0.25 times, it has less leverage than any of its closest peers. It also has relatively modest spending needs, since past investments are currently playing out. Add it all up, and Chevron looks like the cleanest shirt in a dirty industry. If you can handle a little near-term uncertainty, this high-yield oil giant could end up being a very rewarding dividend stock over the long-term. 
When times get tough, it pays to focus on quality. There's no question that W.P. Carey and Chevron represent quality in their respective areas of focus. If you love dividends, the fact that these two companies are in out-of-favor industries shouldn't stop you from digging in here. In fact, it's exactly why you'll want to, because the COVID-19 pandemic is actually highlighting their respective strengths. 



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Oil prices have gone on a wild ride in 2020, with energy companies like Exxon Mobil (NYSE:XOM) and Chevron (NYSE:CVX) taking massive hits on the top and bottom lines. It shouldn't be much of a surprise to see that their stocks have been laid low as well, with Chevron down around 28% so far this year and Exxon off by roughly 38%. If you are looking at the out-of-favor energy sector for investment ideas, however, this pair might be worth examining. But is one a better pick than the other?
Although oil prices literally fell to zero at one point in the first half of 2020, both Chevron and Exxon are likely to survive this rough patch. They are both financially strong companies (more on this in a second) with diversified operations and take a long-term view of the energy market. That means they examine supply and demand over decades, not months. Today, the big issue is the supply disruption caused by the global economic shutdowns used to slow the spread of COVID-19. That is a big problem, but not one that's likely to linger forever, noting that there are massive efforts around the world to develop a vaccine.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Longer term, Exxon and Chevron both recognize that there are clean energy headwinds they have to deal with. However, changing between energy sources takes time and there's likely a great deal of leeway between today's carbon-heavy energy world and one that is focused on carbon-light power options. So there's a reason for longer-term optimism as well. Both will likely get through the current energy market in stride and, in this regard, are on equal footing to benefit from the still-positive long-term trends they expect to unfold.
That said, while Exxon and Chevron both have very strong balance sheets relative to their energy major peers, they are not on equal footing when compared to each other. At the start of 2020, Exxon's debt-to-equity ratio was around 0.25 times, a fairly modest ratio near the bottom of its global peer group. However, Chevron's roughly 0.2 times was even better. 

XOM DEBT-TO-EQUITY RATIO DATA BY YCHARTS
At the risk of understatement, things have changed a little since the start of the year. Notably, Exxon has issued a material amount of debt so that it can continue to support an aggressive capital investment plan and its dividend. Its debt-to-equity ratio is currently close to 0.4 times. That's not a terrible number and is still pretty solid compared to most peers. But Chevron's ratio is still way better, at roughly 0.25 times. Chevron didn't issue as much debt to support its operations through this difficult period and its capital investment plans aren't as sizable as Exxon's (largely because it is currently benefiting from previous spending). When looking at financial strength, Chevron is the clear winner, even though both are in solid positions relative to peers.
That brings up the dividends these two energy giants offer. Exxon's yield is a huge 8% and its dividend has increased annually for 37 consecutive years. Chevron's yield is more modest, at around 5.9%, and its dividend has increased for 33 years running. Both companies have basically stated that their dividends remain important avenues for returning value to investors.   
That said, Exxon's dividend future isn't quite as certain as that of Chevron's. That's why there's a two-percentage-point difference between the dividend yields these two stocks offer today. There are a couple of reasons for this, starting with Exxon's higher leverage. But added to it is the fact that Exxon is in the middle of a spending program that it really needs to finish or its production will start to lag behind its peers. Hitting pause isn't really a good long-term option. If push came to shove, the dividend would likely be sacrificed, noting that the company has already said it doesn't plan to add any more debt. Chevron's production and spending situations aren't nearly as dire. Put simply, Chevron's dividend looks more secure. Once again, Chevron comes out ahead right now.   
Ultimately, both Exxon and Chevron are very well-run energy companies that are likely to muddle through this downturn. Investors looking for an energy play would probably be just fine with either one. However, if you are a conservative investor with a dividend focus, Chevron appears to be in better shape to survive while continuing to reward investors via dividends right now. If you have owned Exxon for many years it may not make sense to sell it, but if you are looking to initiate a new position, Chevron probably has the edge.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


