Employment in the oil and gas industry in the U.S. is growing at a staggering pace. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, employment in the oil and gas extraction sector has grown by 22%. Oil production hotbeds like North Dakota have unemployment rates below 3.5%. If you want a job in the oil industry, though, and the idea of those frigid North Dakota winters is a little to much, then perhaps you should check out this other oil hotbed -- Brazil. 
Petrobras (NYSE:PBR
), Brazil's national oil company, is planning on spending $237 billion over the next seven years to double its oil output to about 5 million barrels per day. On a per-year basis, that much money is the same as one-third of what all U.S. exploration and production companies will spend combined.   
Skills required: Doesn't get seasick
The majority of the oil work that will take place in Brazil lies offshore in what is known as the pre-salt basin. This massive oil field is expected to hold as much as 50 billion barrels of oil and gas and is expected to be a major production area for the next several years. The challenge with this field, though, is that it lies over 170 miles offshore and is 4.4 miles below the ocean's surface. This means that not only will Petrobras need to pour lots of money into exploration and production, but also into building out infrastructure.
To get this infrastructure going, it is signing tons of deals. The company just recently signed a $2.7 billion, eight-year joint venture with Seadrill (NYSE:SDRL
) and SapuraKencana. The two companies will build and operate pipe-laying ships beginning in 2016. The original eight years can be doubled to 16 if Petrobras sees fit. Also, FMC Technologies and GE (NYSE:GE
) have each received $500 million contracts from Petrobras for offshore equipment needed to get platforms up and running in the pre-salt formation. 
Cleanliness is a must
Despite the potential for so much oil in the region, many people in the industry may still be a little skeptical of working offshore Brazil after watching the political fiasco following the Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) spill back in 2011. After spilling about 2,500 barrels of oil, both Chevron and rig manager Transocean (NYSE:RIG
) were threatened with over $20 billion in fines and civil litigation, as well as a permanent expulsion from the country. That would put the spill at about $8 million per barrel spilled, which is astronomical compared to the about $5,000 per barrel BP spent so far on the Macondo spill that occurred back in 2010.
Much of the hullabaloo subsided -- Transocean is a major supplier of rigs to Petrobras, and it would have put a major dent in the Brazilian company's operations. This is one saving grace that oil companies can take from going into the pre-salt formation -- Petrobras will have a 30% working interest in any well drilled there. As the national oil company, regulators may be a little more hesitant of slapping a major fine on it because the company is also responsible for all oil imports and exports for the country. 
What a Fool believes
For Petrobras to reach its lofty production goals, it will need to bring in a lot of help. One of the big questions surrounding Petrobras right now is if the company can execute these major development projects both on time and on budget. One of the big challenges it will face is finding an adequate labor force to get all this oil flowing.
Right now, the Brazilian government stipulates that a certain percentage of labor and equipment in the oil industry must originate from Brazil, but with so much happening in this region it is possible that these regulations could be revised. So for all you roughnecks out there looking to trade in your winter gear for some t-shirt weather, perhaps its time to look into a job off the Brazilian coast.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Chevron (NYSE: CVX) is expected to report Q2 earnings on July 10. Here's what Wall Street wants to see:
The 10-second takeaway
Comparing the upcoming quarter to the prior-year quarter, average analyst estimates predict Chevron's revenues will grow 1.6% and EPS will decrease -15.7%.
The average estimate for revenue is $63.61 billion. On the bottom line, the average EPS estimate is $3.00.
Revenue details
Last quarter, Chevron recorded revenue of $56.82 billion. GAAP reported sales were 8.5% lower than the prior-year quarter's $57.11 billion.
Source: S&P Capital IQ. Quarterly periods. Dollar amounts in millions. Non-GAAP figures may vary to maintain comparability with estimates.
EPS details
Last quarter, EPS came in at $3.18. GAAP EPS of $3.18 for Q1 were 2.8% lower than the prior-year quarter's $3.27 per share.
Source: S&P Capital IQ. Quarterly periods. Non-GAAP figures may vary to maintain comparability with estimates.
Recent performance
For the preceding quarter, gross margin was 29.9%, 100 basis points worse than the prior-year quarter. Operating margin was 14.8%, 320 basis points worse than the prior-year quarter. Net margin was 11.8%, 50 basis points better than the prior-year quarter.
Looking ahead
The full year's average estimate for revenue is $246.64 billion. The average EPS estimate is $12.51.
Investor sentiment
The stock has a five-star rating (out of five) at Motley Fool CAPS, with 4,118 members out of 4,279 rating the stock outperform, and 161 members rating it underperform. Among 964 CAPS All-Star picks (recommendations by the highest-ranked CAPS members), 938 give Chevron a green thumbs-up, and 26 give it a red thumbs-down.
Of Wall Street recommendations tracked by S&P Capital IQ, the average opinion on Chevron is outperform, with an average price target of $128.55.
Is Chevron the right energy stock for you? Read about a handful of timely, profit-producing plays on expensive crude in "3 Stocks for $100 Oil." Click here for instant access to this free report.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



