Even as the stock market closes out a successful first quarter, it's well on its way to posting a third straight day of losses today. Falling unemployment claims weren't enough to assuage fears about world economic activity, and rocky performance from the Chinese stock market has some investors particularly concerned. Others simply believe that investors are taking profits after a huge gain to start 2012. A bit before 1:45 p.m. EDT, the Dow Jones Industrials (INDEX: ^DJI) were down 50 points to 13,077, while the S&P 500 was down 10 points to 1,396.
Among Dow stocks, Coca-Cola (NYSE: KO) rose about three-quarters of a percent. The company opened a new factory in China that will be its largest in the country. Having invested $160 million in the plant, Coke will be able to produce volume of roughly 5 billion units from the facility.
Oil stocks fell slightly, with both ExxonMobil (NYSE: XOM) and Chevron (NYSE: CVX) losing less than half a percent. In a vote in the Senate, lawmakers chose not to repeal current tax incentives for oil companies. The move defies the Obama administration, which lobbied for the repeal to generate $24 billion in revenue over the next decade, some of which would have been used for energy efficiency incentives. In the long run, massive profits at oil companies will inevitably raise political pressure to increase taxes and eliminate subsidies, especially if oil prices stay at high levels.
Finally, Johnson & Johnson (NYSE: JNJ) was down about 0.4%. All eyes are on Washington as the Supreme Court has been hearing arguments about the constitutionality of the health-care reform law. Yet regardless of whether the current private insurance system continues or whether a more nationally based program takes hold, J&J can still point to favorable demographic trends and overseas expansion opportunities as potentially huge profit-makers.
Don't slip up
The worst thing you can do on a down day is to start panicking. The best stocks survive short-term drops to thrive in the long run. Learn about the one stock the Fool's chief investment officer picked to crush the market in this free report: "The Motley Fool's Top Stock for 2012." Instant access is just a click away.



Before you consider The Coca-Cola Company, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and The Coca-Cola Company wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



There's simply no denying how important energy is not only to our economy, but to our very existence. If we need it to live, your portfolio should have it, too. Below I've outlined five stocks to diversify an energy-less portfolio.
A solid bet: Schlumberger (NYSE: SLB)
The oil-field-services giant recently warned that the slowdown in U.S. natural gas drilling may have a negative impact on its bottom line this quarter. That being said, the long term picture for Schlumberger remains strong.
The company is as diverse as can be. With operations in more than 80 countries and a firm commitment to research and development, Schlumberger consistently creates products that are in demand the world over. Its seismic Q-technology is a billion-dollar business, and its HiWAY fracturing technique is used in the U.S. and Russia. On top of that, Schlumberger's strategic acquisitions only contribute to its R&D advantages, as it is more software- and technology-focused than asset-focused, like its competitors.
The riskier move: Kodiak Oil & Gas (NYSE: KOG)
This small energy outfit has made the most of the oil boom in the Bakken for the past two years. Kodiak has grown production 171% and revenue 226% over that time. The risk with Kodiak is the same for most of the smaller oil and gas producers. If something goes wrong, even if it's a change in the weather, the company can't mitigate losses with production from other assets -- because there are no other assets. If everything goes according to plan, however, the returns are quite nice.

KOG data by YCharts.
Over the past 12 months, Kodiak's share price has increased more than 42%. Don't be surprised if this one keeps climbing, either. Management plans to bring on 51 net wells this year, and the target exit rate of 30,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day is double what it was last year.
The toll road: Plains All American Pipeline (NYSE: PAA)
Midstream companies tend to pique interest with their high yields, and Plains is no exception to that rule. With its stock's 5.2% yield and an annualized dividend of $4.10 per share, the company is compelling indeed. There is plenty to like beyond that, however -- Plains is growing fast, and the story keeps getting better and better.
Last November, Plains struck a deal with BP to buy its Canadian natural gas liquids operations. The $1.67 billion deal gave Plains 2,600 miles of pipeline, special gas extracting plants, and storage facilities.
The company is also teaming up with SandRidge Energy to bring a new 170-mile pipeline to the Mississippi Lime region, signing a deal to transport the oil back to the hub in Cushing, Okla. The new pipeline will have capacity of 175,000 barrels per day.
The tangential play: CSX (NYSE: CSX)
Natural gas may be killing coal, but railroads aren't suffering from the change. Though coal shipments are beginning to decline for CSX, shipments of hydraulic fracturing sand increased by 40% to 12,000 carloads in 2011.
All of the energy production in the Marcellus shale is driving the growth at East Coast railroads like Norfolk Southern and CSX. Norfolk Southern's total carloads to the Marcellus region rose an astounding 67% last year. Deliveries of pipe and drilling equipment, along with the increase in sand shipments, are fueling the growth.
The hedged bet: Chevron (NYSE: CVX)
Chevron is America's second biggest energy company after ExxonMobil, but the company's commitment to alternative energy makes it a great hedge against traditional fossil fuels. Chevron is the world's largest producer of geothermal energy. The company began its geothermal work in the 1960s in Northern California, and it's grown operations to include projects in the Philippines and Indonesia. Chevron's geothermal production in those countries has the capacity to reach 1,273 megawatts.
Additionally, Chevron sponsors the Cleantech Open, an annual competition geared to foster the growth of green technology companies.
Foolish takeaway
The energy industry offers a ton of options for investors looking to diversify their portfolios. If your portfolio is already chock-full of energy stocks (brilliant!) consider checking out nine more ideas with The Fool's special free report, "Secure Your Future With 9 Rock-Solid Dividend Stocks."



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



Back in January, I was concerned about circumstances in Iran and the Middle East in general. Included was the likelihood of an increased, Shiite-driven, Iran-Iraq linkage that seemed to pose a real threat to the region, perhaps to distant nations, and certainly to global crude prices.
The good news is that in the brief period since I expressed those thoughts, some aspects of the situation in the Middle East have improved significantly. The bad news is that others have not.
What's up, Doc?
On the positive side, this week Iraq has quietly been hosting a summit of the Arab League in Baghdad. Clearly the country has been using the event to make nice to its Arab neighbors, an encouraging note for those of us with concerns about where a closer relationship with Iran might lead.
Those concerns have naturally been intensified by the presence in the war-torn country of Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE: RDS-B), France's Total SA. (NYSE: TOT), BP (NYSE: BP), and Halliburton (NYSE: HAL), which are among the world's major oil and oil-field service companies. Those companies' workers are diligently (and generally successfully) endeavoring to return some spunk to the production rates of the huge but long-neglected fields of Iraq.
Their efforts would be severely threatened by an Iranian movement for a piece of Iraq's energy action. Yet that outcome had almost seemed inevitable to those watching the figurative distance narrowing between the two countries, both of which are populated by Shiite Muslim majorities. That, of course, is distinctly opposed to Saudi Arabia, a primarily Sunni oil kingpin. Only Chevron (NYSE: CVX), among the big Western companies, is toiling beside Saudi Aramco in the kingdom.
Closer to the kingdom
It's precisely the Saudis that Iraq appears to be most concertedly cozying up to. Iraq is probably seeking help to establish its identity in the face of potential designs on the country by both Iraq and Turkey, the two competing kingpins in the region. As a result, Iraq has several significant initiatives under way with its largely Sunni neighbor.
For instance, Baghdad and Riyadh recently inked a pact whereby Iraq would return several prisoners, including suspected al-Qaida operatives, whom the government of Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki had suspected of being involved in a spate of suicide bombings targeting his Shiite majority. In addition, the countries have reached a related agreement through which Saudi Arabia has designated its first envoy to Iraq since the early days of the Hussein regime.
Certainly more important from a commercial perspective is consideration being given by Iraq and the Saudis regarding a previously discarded pipeline project that would connect the oil fields of southern Iraq to Yanbu, a Saudi port on the Red Sea. The project, which was halted more than two decades ago at the outset of the first Gulf War, would afford the Iraqis an outlet for their crude, should Iran follow through on its threats to interrupt traffic in the Strait of Hormuz.
A newly jovial neighbor
Along with its newfound amicability with Saudi Arabia, Iraq appears to be patching up old wounds with both Kuwait and Egypt. In both instances, the events that triggered consternation between Iraq and the other two Arab countries date back to the 1980s and 1990s.
None of this is to imply that all is peaches and cream in the Middle East. Syria's battles continue to rage, allowing not a glimpse of light at the end of the tunnel. Furthermore, the nature of Egypt's leadership remains solely in the eye of the beholder. And Iran's economy has been torn asunder by U.S.-led sanctions as the mullahs, President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, and other powers that be press ahead obstinately in the development of nuclear weaponry.
The Foolish bottom line
Fearing stronger crackdowns or perhaps outright war, as The Wall Street Journal detailed Tuesday, Iran is feverishly buying wheat from wherever possible -- including the U.S. -- to provide at least the staples of its citizenry's diet in the event of a conflagration. And those efforts just might be well-founded: It's difficult to read or hear a speech by Israel's Benjamin Netanyahu without arriving at the assumption that the die has likely been cast in that direction.
As investors, however, it remains prudent to continue to view energy as an appropriate core of portfolio composition. On that basis, I'd urge Fools to click on the links below to add these important international producers to their watchlists.



Before you consider Royal Dutch Shell plc, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Royal Dutch Shell plc wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



