It's been a great ride to new record highs for the markets, but stocks had to catch a breather eventually. The Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI
) has done just that today -- it's danced in negative to flat territory, and as of 2:15 p.m. EDT, the index is down just 5 points. Stocks are fairly evenly split between risers and laggards, with a pair of losers in the energy sector weighing down the index. As we finish up a slow Friday for investors everywhere, let's catch up on the movers you need to know.
Energy giants in the red
Exxon-Mobil's (NYSE:XOM
) firmly in the red today, down 1.2% to rank among the Dow's biggest laggards. This comes despite Exxon's announced plans today to open a $10 billion liquefied natural gas plant on the Gulf Coast in Texas. The agreement could see the facility produce more than 15 million metric tons of LNG annually as Exxon and other natural gas producers look to evade low domestic prices by capitalizing on exports.
Big oil rival Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) isn't having much of a day to remember, either, as shares have fallen 0.9% so far. The company did post good news today, however: Chevron won a lawsuit against the U.S. over a dispute surrounding its oil fields near Bakersfield, California. The companies have battled for years over the split between Chevron's and the Department of Energy's stakes in the fields. While Chevron's still disputing the DoE's share, the U.S. will have to reimburse the company for 42% of its legal fees for a two-year period.
Outside of the energy sector, Caterpillar (NYSE:CAT
) shares are performing even worse today. The industrial giant's stock has fallen 1.9% today to lead all Dow laggards lower. The company cut off talks with the United Steelworkers union in Milwaukee today as a labor dispute continues to rage at its mining equipment plant. The mining industry's downturn, sparked by China's slowdown and other leading economies slumping, has forced Caterpillar to lay off hundreds of mining equipment workers already. Caterpillar's Milwaukee plant remains open as this labor dispute continues, but until the global economy picks up, the company's mining business will continue to struggle.
On a bright note for the Dow, shares of Merck (NYSE:MRK
) have traded higher today, advancing 0.9% so far. The company has offered up its HPV vaccine Gardasil at a 95% discount to impoverished nations, part of a deal with the GAVI Alliance partnership to boost immunization rates in developing populations. Merck's done well with Gardasil commercially as well, however; the vaccine has been one of the company's best-sellers even as the firm struggles with patent expirations of other blockbuster drugs. Last year, Gardasil posted more than $1.6 billion in sales, a year-over-year gain of more than 34%.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


After a number of weeks in which the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI
) rose or fell more than 100 points multiple days in a row, this week has been very calm -- the largest move the index made over the past four trading sessions was on Tuesday when it rose 88 points. Furthermore, despite declining two of the past four days, the Dow looks as if it will end the week higher even if the 19 points the blue-chip stocks are down as of 12:45 p.m. EDT holds for the remainder of the day. But based on what the other two major indexes are doing today, that may not be the case. Although it has been an up-and-down day for the S&P 500, the index is currently just 0.01% lower, while the NASDAQ is easily higher by 0.34%.
Let's briefly take a look at a few of the reasons why the Dow is lower today.
Shares of both the Dow's oil companies, Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) and ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
), are trading lower today as the price of light crude oil falls 2.74%. Chevron is currently down 1.02% as Exxon has declined 1.23%. Both companies are highly dependent on the price of oil, and when the value of black gold declines, the profits for the major oil companies falls right alongside. Long-time shareholders of either company know that these stocks are rather volatile and move up and down more than 1% regularly, but investors who are just considering these stocks need to determine if they can handle the roller-coaster ride before they strap into the seat.  
Another Dow component losing today because of falling commodity prices is Caterpillar (NYSE:CAT
); shares are down 2.11%. While Caterpillar does not have any direct relationship with commodities, a large portion of the company's business is selling heavy machinery to companies that mine for different commoditized metals. With the price of gold way off its highs of just under $1,800 per once, and down another 3% today, the gold miners will likely begin cutting back on expenses, which may include new equipment. Additionally, both silver and platinum are lower by more than 2.5% today and have also followed the downward slope that gold has been riding the past few weeks.  
As the metals markets decline across the board today, the aluminum giant Alcoa (NYSE:AA
) is also down 1.71%. This is bad news to some, but great news to other investors who have a short interest in the stock, which is currently a rather large number of people. Currently, Alcoa is the second most shorted Dow component, and it seems that the number of shares that have been shorted has continued to grow over the past few months. While average-joe investors may see shorting as an easy way to make money, like with the oil companies, they need to fully understand the risks involved with this type of investing before getting starting.  




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


