When the market is volatile and the economy worrying, collecting dividend checks can give you peace of mind. The effort to contain COVID-19, however, has led to a raft of dividend cuts. So it's extra important today to stick with companies that have the wherewithal to keep paying even when times are tough. With that in mind, you should look at cash cow stocks W.P. Carey (NYSE:WPC), International Business Machines (NYSE:IBM), and Chevron Corporation (NYSE:CVX).
When it comes to real estate investing, the mantra is usually location, location, location. That's always going to be true, but the most unique thing about real estate investment trust (REIT) W.P. Carey is its diversification. Its portfolio is spread across the industrial (24% of rents), office (23%), warehouse (22%), retail (17%), and self storage (5%) property niches, with "other" making up the rest. And it generated around a third of its top line from Europe. That level of diversification is pretty unique in the REIT sector. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
Now add that fact that it is a net-lease REIT, which means its tenants are responsible for most of the costs of the properties they occupy. Moreover, leases tend to be pretty long, with Carey's average lease length at roughly 10 years today. Leases also generally include regular rent increases, often tied to inflation. The benefit of all of this? While some other landlords were having a hard time getting paid in April, W.P. Carey was able to collect 95% of its rents. 
With a yield of 7% backed by 23 years of annual dividend increases (one for every year as a public company), investors looking for cash cows should be doing a deep dive here. 
There's been very little love for technology giant IBM in recent years. The reason is pretty easy to understand. This lumbering giant has been shifting its portfolio to better serve customers, and that's included jettisoning low-margin businesses like making computers so it can refocus around in-demand technology, including cloud computing, artificial intelligence, and security. The biggest move by far was the purchase of Red Hat, a fast-growing name that will help IBM compete with cloud providers that got a head start on the company. The key is that Red Hat will allow IBM to provide expanded services on its own products and those of its competitors as it looks to help its business-to-business customers implement hybrid cloud (part internal/part external) setups. 
The problem here is that the Red Hat acquisition required IBM to add a lot of debt at a time when its top line has been shrinking. The revenue trend is the big concern on Wall Street, but it makes sense. The tech giant has been shedding mature businesses while buying smaller, faster-growing ones with higher margins. The new businesses simply haven't made up for what's been sold yet.
That said, it takes time to turn a ship as large as IBM. At this point the new businesses make up about half of the company's revenue, so a key inflection point could be close at hand. 

SPY DIVIDEND YIELD DATA BY YCHARTS
The debt pile, meanwhile, has already been reduced by more than 10% in less than a year. In other words, IBM is on it. Meanwhile, it still covered its trailing interest expenses by 8.5 times in the first quarter, so it isn't really having much of a problem carrying the load. As for the dividend, the company's yield is a generous 5.3% backed by roughly a quarter century's worth of annual hikes. Sure, COVID-19 will be a headwind, but IBM looks like it has the chops to survive this and keep throwing off heaps of cash. 
The last name here is oil and natural gas giant Chevron, which is offering investors a 5.5% yield backed by 33 years worth of annual dividend increases. That's the good news. The bad news is that oil prices are painfully low today -- so low that the entire energy sector is retrenching, with companies both big and small pulling back hard on spending. That list includes Chevron. 
The backstory here is terrible. The effort to contain COVID-19 has resulted in a steep decline in demand for energy. That's resulted in a massive oversupply of oil, and thus low prices for a commodity that pretty much dictates Chevron's revenue and earnings. Still, it's built to survive tough times like these, with a financial debt to equity ratio (roughly 0.25 times) that is the lowest among its peer group. Chevron can lean on its balance sheet to muddle through the near-term disruption as it focuses on the long-term. 
The fact is, oil and natural gas are vital energy sources that will take time to displace. And while the oversupply situation today is pretty extreme, the energy sector has always been cyclical. The pullback taking shape right now will, if history is any guide, lead to a price recovery. While you wait for that to happen, as it has many times before, you can collect the big cash dividend Chevron throws off.
When the market is going crazy, dividend investors can sit back and focus on the dividends their portfolios are generating. Sure, that plan could fall apart if you stick your neck out and buy risky high-yield dividend stocks like mortgage REITs, which have a history of cutting dividends. But W.P. Carey, IBM, and Chevron are made of sturdier stuff. If you are looking for some high-yield cash cows today, this trio should be on your short list.



Before you consider International Business Machines Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and International Business Machines Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


The world is in a state of turmoil as people look to contain the spread of COVID-19, and one of the worst-hit industries is energy. But don't run for the hills. There are some interesting companies in the sector that have what it takes to survive this rough patch. They will likely thrive when this situation eventually passes. For those with a little moxie, it may actually be a good time to look at energy stocks Chevron Corporation (NYSE:CVX), Enterprise Products Partners (NYSE:EPD), and Total SA (NYSE:TOT).
Chevron is one of the largest and strongest integrated energy companies on the planet. The best example of the company's strength is its rock-solid balance sheet, where financial debt to equity sits at roughly 0.25 times -- the lowest among its closest peers. Moreover, like its peers, Chevron's business spans from the upstream (drilling) space through to the downstream (chemicals and refining) sector, providing diversification to its business. To be fair, everything the company does is facing headwinds at the moment, since demand across the spectrum has fallen as countries basically shut down to slow the spread of COVID-19. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
With a solid balance sheet, however, Chevron can lean on its strong financial foundation to keep spending and supporting its fat 5.5% dividend yield; it has 33 years of annual dividend hikes. And it isn't sitting still. In fact, like the rest of the industry, it's pulling back on spending. The widespread pullbacks in the industry, meanwhile, will help to balance out supply and demand, and will eventually lead to higher energy prices. This downturn may be historically bad, but such volatility isn't unusual in the highly cyclical energy space. Meanwhile, oil remains an important global energy source, and will likely continue to be vital for many years to come. 
Chevron is basically in a strong position relative to peers. Past spending has been bearing fruit and pushing up production. Going into this downturn, the energy giant's spending was already relatively low and now this conservative oil major has simply gotten even more conservative. That means investors can collect a fat yield while waiting for this difficult cycle to pass, just like every energy downturn before it has. 
Chevron's top and bottom lines are tied directly to oil prices, so there's still plenty of volatility ahead on the company's income statement. If that's too much for you to bear, then consider Enterprise Products Partners, one of the largest midstream players in North America. This master limited partnership owns a vast collection of pipelines, storage, transportation assets, and processing facilities, all of which help get oil and natural gas, and the products they get turned into, from the drill hole to end customers. It would be close to impossible to replicate Enterprise's portfolio. 
That size and diversification is an important differentiator, but even more important for income investors is the fact that roughly 85% of the partnership's top line comes from fees. Effectively, it gets paid for the use of its assets, with the often-volatile price of oil playing only a minor role in its cash flows. That's nice to know, but so, too, is the fact that Enterprise covered its distribution by 1.6 times in the first quarter. That should provide ample leeway for the partnership to muddle through this downturn without having to cut its distribution. Meanwhile, Enterprise has long been among the most conservatively financed midstream players in the sector, providing another layer of protection. 

EPD DIVIDEND YIELD DATA BY YCHARTS
Yes, Enterprise is pulling back on capital spending, just like virtually every other energy company. That will likely slow growth, but survival is the big issue on investors' minds today. And if history is any guide, Enterprise will still be standing when the energy sector eventually recovers. To back that up, consider that the partnership's hefty 9.8% yield comes after more than two decades of annual distribution increases. Distribution growth has never been exciting, sitting in the low-to-mid-single digits -- but if slow and steady is your speed, then you need to do a deep dive here. 
The last name on this list is a bit of a different story. French energy giant Total isn't one of the most conservatively financed companies in the industry. Its spending plans aren't particularly modest, either, though it is pulling back on capital spending just like its peers. In fact, if you look at Total as an oil and natural gas company, Chevron is really a better bet today. But there's a big difference between the two companies, beyond Total's much higher 8.2% yield. (Note that Total's dividend has remained the same or risen for 35 years running, which is impressive, but not quite as good a history as Chevron's.) 
Chevron is focused exclusively on oil and gas, but Total is working to expand its portfolio to include electricity. It started this shift years ago, and it's still pretty early in the process. But it has been willing to make some notable moves, including paying $1.6 billion in 2018 to buy a European utility. It just announced plans to acquire another utility operation in Spain, too, so increasing its diversification outside of its core oil business is obviously still a key priority. More to the point, it places Total in a position to provide the energy source that most believe will replace oil and natural gas over time. Put simply, this energy giant is working to transition today for the eventual disruption of its core business. 
That sounds like a pretty solid plan, with Total using its core operations as the foundation on which it builds for the future. And if that seems like a good compromise during a difficult period for energy stocks, then you should take a closer look at Total and its budding electric operation while the shares are still being beaten down because of its legacy oil business.
There's no question that the global market for oil and natural gas is in a state of disarray thanks to COVID-19. However, there are industry players that are built to survive this type of disruption, like Chevron and Enterprise. Because Wall Street fears the worst, you can collect fat yields while you wait for this painful cycle to run its course. Meanwhile, the negative sentiment has put Total on sale, too. And while it isn't quite as conservative as the other two names on this list, it is working to prepare for the world's long-term shift toward electricity. It wouldn't be too bad to collect Total's hefty dividend checks while you watch it make that transition.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


If a stock is down more than 25% year to date, that sounds pretty bad. But when that stock is in the oil industry, and its peers are down between 35% and 50% year to date, that sounds pretty good. It also sounds like integrated oil major Chevron (NYSE:CVX).
Chevron is the second-largest energy company in the world by market cap, surpassed only by its fellow U.S. oil juggernaut ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM). But of the five oil majors, it's actually the smallest in terms of annual revenue. It has the least amount of debt among its peers, but also the second-lowest dividend yield. It's tough to know what to make of all these contradictions. 
Let's take a closer look at Chevron to see whether it's a buy.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
A big reason for Chevron's poor performance this year is low oil prices. When an oil price war broke out between Saudi Arabia and Russia in early March, global oil prices were cut roughly in half. Since then, the major benchmark per-barrel prices have mostly bounced around between the high teens and low $30s. Currently, international benchmark Brent crude and U.S. benchmark WTI crude are both trading above $30 per barrel, which has caused some optimism within the oil industry. 
The trouble is, Chevron can't make money even at $30-per-barrel Brent crude, even with a 30% reduction in its 2020 capital expense budget. On its Q1 earnings call, the company projected $30-per-barrel Brent crude through the first half of 2021. At that price, the company estimated it could cover its dividend with funds from operations, but would have to take on debt and/or sell assets to cover all its other expenses, including capital expenses. 
With fuel demand beginning to increase as countries start lifting coronavirus-related travel restrictions, and with OPEC+ production cuts kicking in this month, it's possible oil prices will be higher than Chevron expects. But it's equally possible that a resurgence of COVID-19, another price war, lack of available oil storage, or some other unrelated incident will result in lower prices than Chevron is predicting. 
It's worth noting that the last time oil prices were this low was in 2016, during which time Chevron posted three consecutive quarterly net losses. 
Of course, if nearly all your operating cash flow is flowing straight into dividend payments, one easy solution would be to cut the dividend. However, that doesn't seem likely for Chevron -- at least, not anytime soon.
Like its peer ExxonMobil, Chevron is a Dividend Aristocrat. It has upped its payout every year for the last 33 consecutive years with no cuts. Management knows how important that is to shareholders, and made "protect the dividend" one of its four main strategies to safeguard its balance sheet.
Considering that Chevron's Plan A involves taking on debt, it's a good thing the company's balance sheet is solid. Chevron currently boasts the best balance sheet of the integrated majors. Its current credit ratings of AA/Aa2 were recently affirmed by S&P Global and Moody's, which should allow it to access low-cost debt. Meanwhile, management bragged on the earnings call that its "net debt ratio" of 14% was lower than its peers, and could be safely raised to 25%.
In other words, Chevron seems well positioned to weather the current conditions in the oil markets without trimming its dividend. 
Just because Chevron seems likely to make it out the other side doesn't mean it's a buy, though. 
Remember that Chevron's plan is to basically batten down the hatches, take on billions of dollars in debt, pay its full dividend, and hope for a brighter future. That's not exactly a compelling business proposition. On top of that, the company is cutting capital expenses and production, especially onshore unconventional production, which is generally higher cost and lower margin. But Chevron has a lot of onshore unconventional production in its portfolio.
In 2019, 38.8% of Chevron's liquids production was U.S.-based (the highest percentage among the integrated majors), and 48% of that was Permian Basin unconventional production: 18.6% of the company's total, or about 446,000 barrels of oil equivalents per day. Chevron has announced that most of its $2.5 billion in unconventional production spending cuts will be coming from the Permian Basin, where it is already curtailing production and cutting rigs. That's a lot of high-cost production to cut that won't be made up elsewhere, which may leave the company in in a weakened position when (if) oil prices rise above $50 per barrel again. 
With its strong balance sheet and commitment to maintaining its dividend, which currently offers a solid 5.4% yield, Chevron is worth a closer look for dividend investors. 
For everyone else, the company -- and the oil industry in general -- looks to be preparing for a long, hard slog over the next couple of years. There are better places in the energy sector for your money right now.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


In the midst of the coronavirus pandemic and the ensuing economic lockdown, many well-established dividend-paying stocks have been under duress. Old business models have been strained by shelter-in-place and work-from-home orders, and by now it's a foregone conclusion that global recession is here.
Nevertheless, many of these dividend stocks are in better shape than they may appear to be. Three that I own and plan to buy more of are AT&T (NYSE:T), STORE Capital (NYSE:STOR), and Chevron (NYSE:CVX). Let's take a closer look at these three companies and see if they might be right for the dividend-focused portion of your portfolio.
If ever there was an imperfect telecommunications stock, it would be AT&T. In fact, some flaws could be considered major grievances. Shifting away from its bread-and-butter mobile network service, the company racked up massive debt purchasing DirecTV in 2015 and Time Warner in 2018, leaving it with a heaping $164 billion in long-term liabilities at the end of its first quarter of 2020.  
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The problem compounds when you consider that DirecTV has been bleeding subscribers because of the cord-cutting movement and migration to streaming TV, the Warner Media segment is losing ad revenue from sporting events being canceled, and movie theaters are shuttered until at least the summer. AT&T has been experimenting with direct-to-consumer movie sales with the box office all but eliminated at the moment, and has a streaming service of its own, HBO Max, on the way. But all told, total revenue fell 4.5% in the first quarter, and the company had to ax its share repurchase plan to conserve cash.
As ugly as it looks, though, the mobile telecom business remains on solid footing and notched a 2.5% and 9% increase in service revenue and operating income at the beginning of the year. And in spite of headwinds working against its media business, free cash flow (what's left after cash operating and capital expenses, and from which dividends are paid) was $3.9 billion. Total dividends paid in the quarter were $3.7 billion, close to eating up all of the spare cash, but it's a situation that will be mitigated by cost cuts and the aforementioned elimination of share repurchases.  
Simply put, while this is no growth story, shares tumbling 25% so far this year have the stock currently yielding 7.2% a year. With its primary mobile network services a staple -- even during the pandemic crisis -- AT&T is ideal for investors seeking income.  
Businesses that relies on in-person interaction have been clobbered by COVID-19, and that is no more apparent than in the real estate industry. STORE Capital -- which focuses on single-tenant commercial buildings with long-term lease agreements -- has been hit especially hard. Units of the real estate investment trust (REIT) have been more than halved in value so far in 2020.  
While it owns a diverse portfolio of more than 2,500 properties and no single customer makes up more than a low single-digit percentage of income, some two-thirds of STORE's real estate is rented out to the service sector. Spaces including restaurants, movie theaters, family entertainment venues, early childhood education centers, and health clubs comprised about one-third of rental income in 2019. With many of those businesses outright closed or operations heavily restricted at the moment, it's no wonder STORE's share price has fallen precipitously.  
However, while the dividend payout (currently good for 7.5% a year) may need to be adjusted at some point, STORE is in better shape than it gets credit for. The company's properties were nearly 100% occupied at the end of March, almost 70% of April rent and interest payments had been collected, and nearly all those rents remaining negotiated deferred payments that included higher interest, lease payment escalation, or lease term extensions. That's a good sign that a recovery is in the works. 
CEO Christopher Volk told me he is optimistic about the long-term prospects for the industries STORE services, and the company remains committed to managing its portfolio for the long term (rather than making drastic changes based on what has already happened). STORE has the financial strength to stick to that plan. Its debt-to-equity is one of the lowest among its commercial real estate peers, and the company had enough liquidity on hand to cover two and a half years' worth of 2019 operating and interest expenses. This is a solid bet on an eventual real estate recovery, and the dividend payout only sweetens the deal along the way.  
Chevron is one of the largest energy companies on the planet, but not even it has been immune to the economic lockdown and (brief) oil price war between Russia and Saudi Arabia in March 2020. After writing down $6.6 billion due to asset impairment at the end of 2019, Chevron's Q1 2020 got off to a rough start with operating income falling 8% due to lower energy prices. It's likely going to get worse in Q2 as oil remains in a slump while the world grapples with COVID-19.  
However, the company has stated that maintaining its dividend is a top priority. Share repurchases have been suspended to conserve cash, capital spending on new projects has been cut, and asset sales have been made to shore up the balance sheet, leaving the energy giant in good shape to weather the storm. The capital-intensive nature of the industry means Chevron's total debt sat at $32.4 billion at the end of March, but cash and equivalents were $8.5 billion. Put simply, the company has some wiggle room.  
And what of the dividend? A total of $2.4 billion was paid out to shareholders in Q1, but free cash flow was only $1.6 billion. It's not a sustainable situation to say the least, but cutting capital expenses (which totaled $3.1 billion the first three months of the year) will do the trick, giving the company time to ride out the current dismal energy price scenario.  
But it's ultimately Chevron's ability to generate positive cash even in a less-than-ideal environment, and its deep pockets, that makes this a solid income investment. Shares are currently yielding 5.8% a year. Though it looks precarious at the moment, Chevron is still in good shape -- especially considering many of its smaller peers are at risk of folding right now. I like this oil major's chances of surviving and thriving once the crisis abates.



Before you consider AT&T Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and AT&T Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


