
Although we don't believe in timing the market or panicking over daily movements, we do like to keep an eye on market changes -- just in case they're material to our investing thesis.
The jobs market dominated financial news this past week. On Wednesday, ADP's report on private-sector job growth for December came in at 238,000, beating economists' expectations of 200,000. OnThursday, the weekly jobless-claims report tallied 330,000, a figure just 1,000 below the consensus estimates. And on Friday, the most important Labor Department report for December came in at only 74,000 new jobs, well below the 200,000 the professionals were expecting. The Labor Department also reported on Friday that the unemployment rate fell from 7% to 6.7% in December, after the labor force participation rate dropped from 63% to 62.8%.  
These figures indicate that the economy may not be as strong as many had hoped and that business growth may continue to sluggishly move along. The one bit of good news from Friday's report was that Treasury bond yields fell on the news, as investors bet that the Federal Reserve will hold interest rates down for a longer time than previously believed. The weaker rates helped housing stocks rally, but the combined news throughout the week was too much for the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI
) to overcome. The blue-chip index closed the week down 32 points, or 0.2%, and now rests at 16,437. The S&P 500 and Nasdaq, on the other hand, did manage to finish the week higher, as they gained 0.6% and 1.03%, respectively, over the past five trading days.
Before we get to the Dow's biggest losers, let's look at its top performer, Johnson & Johnson (NYSE:JNJ
), which rose 3.14% this week after two different analysts upgraded the stock. RBC Capital and Argus both believe the company's pharmaceutical unit will help the company in the coming years. Many investors have been focusing on the health-care industry as a great place to make money, since the Affordable Care Act's individual mandate opens the potential for bigger profits for insurance companies, hospitals, medical-device manufacturers, and the pharmaceutical industry. Whether it all plays out that way remains to be seen, but J&J shareholders aren't complaining today.  
Last week's big losers
ExxonMobil was the biggest Dow loser two weeks ago, after shedding 1.97% of its value. This week the oil and gas company rose 1.01%, while fellow Dow energy play Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) was the index's second biggest decliner, losing 2.68%. Preliminary earnings results came out on Friday, and Chevron said it expected its fourth-quarter earnings to be comparable with year-ago results. But while net oil-equivalent production was slightly lower for the quarter, that's been offset by higher natural gas prices over the past few months. So some of the news seemed decent, but the report of flat earnings was probably the biggest reason shares fell.  
The Dow's third-place finisher this week was Microsoft (NASDAQ:MSFT
), whose shares fell 2.35%, even despite a 1.44% gain on Friday. Microsoft's week got off to a bad start, when The Wall Street Journal reported on Monday that both Bill Gates and current CEO Steve Ballmer will remain on the company's board of directors after Ballmer is replaced. There's concern that their continued presence could hamper a new CEO's independence. Shares fell 2.11% on Monday, followed by a 1.6% drop on Wednesday, after Ford CEO Alan Mulally finally made it public that he won't pursue the Microsoft job. His announcement ended months of speculation about whether he was Microsoft's top choice. So the CEO drama continues, but investors focused on the long term should just ride this out.
And finally, the Dow's worst-performing component of the week was AT&T (NYSE:T
). Most of its 3.39% drop came on Thursday, following an announcement the night before that T-Mobile will pay the early termination fees of AT&T and Verizon customers. This is just another in T-Mobile's long list of attacks on its competitors over the past few months, as the smaller carrier tries to draw in customers and grow the business.  
The other Dow losers this week:




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


With the Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI
) still trading close to all-time record highs, you might think that you couldn't find any attractively priced stocks among the 30 components of the blue-chip benchmark. But when you look at their share prices compared to projections for future earnings, you can actually find a good number of stocks trading at reasonable valuations. Still, low earnings multiples don't always equate to good value, so let's take a closer look at JPMorgan Chase (NYSE:JPM
), Chevron (NYSE:CVX
), IBM (NYSE:IBM
), and Travelers (NYSE:TRV
) to see if their shares really are smart bargains or whether there's a good reason for them to fetch a lower valuation compared to their earnings.
At just 9.95 times next year's earnings, JPMorgan is the only stock in the Dow to have a forward P/E less than 10. Yet the real question for investors to answer with the Wall Street bank is whether earnings have hit a cyclical peak, or whether future earnings growth is actually realistic. Bearish investors have argued that regulation would essentially cap earnings power for JPMorgan well below its pre-crisis levels. But even modest growth would be enough to make JPMorgan stock look attractive at current prices, especially if the bank continues to raise its dividend and strengthen its balance sheet.
SOURCE: 401(K) 2013.
Chevron weighs in at 10.4 times forward earnings estimates, but here, there's an even bigger concern that cyclical factors could shrink earnings in the near future. Just earlier this week, Chevron issued preliminary figures from its fourth quarter that showed production drops and falling realization prices for its upstream segment, causing the stock to drop in response. Oil prices have remained relatively high, but even slight deterioration in energy prices has hurt Chevron's profit potential. It'll take huge amounts of effort for Chevron just to maintain production levels, let alone grow them. That makes Chevron's valuation a bit more justified than some other cheap stocks.
IBM trades at 10.6 times projections for forward earnings, and even though the tech giant has suffered from falling revenue levels lately, so far, they haven't translated into a drop in earnings per share. Immense buybacks have played a big role in boosting earnings projections, with Big Blue still seeking $20 in earnings per share by 2015. Even though IBM faces plenty of challenges, bullish investors have high hopes for growth opportunities as the company keeps striving to lead in the data-analytics area as well as cloud computing more broadly.
Travelers had a good 2013, thanks largely to a lack of major loss experience after two previous years of harsh storms. Few expect 2014 to go as well as 2013 did, making forward earnings projections somewhat misleading in terms of long-term earnings growth. The big question for Travelers is whether rising interest rates will hurt its bond investment portfolio more than higher yields will help its overall income. Still, until the next bad storm hits, Travelers looks like a solid pick in the insurance industry.
Be smart with value
It's never enough just to look at earnings multiples without assessing growth prospects and other fundamentals. For these Dow stocks, varying levels of promise make them appropriate for different investors, depending on your risk profile and time horizon.



Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


