The stock market has had a strange relationship with the Federal Reserve lately. Whenever the Fed says anything about even the possibility of future action to stimulate economic growth, stocks soar -- like they did this morning. Yet Fed Chair Ben Bernanke's comments that the Fed would "provide additional policy accommodation as needed" merely repeats the same message he's given for months, making any market reaction whatsoever look ridiculous. Still, investors dutifully bid up share prices in response, and the Dow Jones Industrials (INDEX: ^DJI) recovered all of its losses from yesterday before slipping a bit. The Dow was still up about 100 points just after 10:45 a.m. EDT. All 30 Dow stocks traded higher.
Intel (Nasdaq: INTC) was the big gainer in the Dow, rising more than 2% despite ongoing concerns about weak PC demand. As Fool analyst Austin Smith discussed earlier this morning, though, Intel's biggest potential lies beyond the PC realm, as the company moves forward with plans to increase its market share in mobile devices and other high-growth areas.
Travelers (NYSE: TRV) rose about half a percent. Early estimates about the damage from Hurricane Isaac suggest that the total toll could amount to around $2 billion. Even though primary insurers will carry most of the burden of the losses, analysts believe that Travelers, Allstate (NYSE: ALL), and other insurers are in good position to deal with the losses.
In other Isaac-related news, Chevron (NYSE: CVX) rose more than 1% after saying that it intends to move staff back to offshore platforms starting today. Although the hurricane's presence in the Gulf stirred concerns about production hits, it appears that the impact of the storm will be minimal, which is good news both for the overall economy and for Chevron and other oil and gas producers.
Stop listening to the Fed-speak
Fed-heads will keep talking, but you owe it to yourself not to let them derail you from coming up with your own investing strategy. The right information can help. For instance, in this premium research report on Intel, our top tech analysts run through all of the key topics investors need to understand with the chip giant. Better yet, you'll continue to receive updates throughout the year as news develops Click here now to learn more.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



Oil companies want you to know they are doing everything in their power to drive the movement towards sustainable energy alternatives, instead of toward the substance that makes them the largest, most profitable, oligopolies in history. When an oil company advertises, we see a white-coated person, presumably a member of science, telling the audience that their employer is contributing billions of dollars to research and innovation in the field of alternative energy. But, unsurprisingly, the numbers don¡¯t back up the chitchat. Do they really think we¡¯re buying this?
Large numbers and images of ¡®technology¡¯
First of all, I don¡¯t hate oil companies. Really, I don¡¯t. Do they appear to be price-fixing, world-controlling, environment-destroying corporations who seem to win no matter what the price of a barrel is? Well, yeah. But, hey, someone has to do it, right? I respect the sacrifices they make.
What I don¡¯t understand about them, though, is that they seem to want us to believe that they are doing everything they can to get us off the slick. For the sake of the earth, for the sake of world peace, for whatever reasons the liberal hippies can think of, oil companies are on our side, and are pushing hard for the energy revolution. At least, that¡¯s what one would think after watching the average BP (NYSE: BP) or Chevron (NYSE: CVX) ad on television.
But how much do these guys really put toward alternative fuels? The advertisements use numbers that end in 'billion' to describe their monetary contribution to what would destroy their own business. That¡¯s not impossible to believe -- many corporations cut off their own legs.
Behind the white-coated professional and graphics with arrows pointing at things we don¡¯t understand, are real numbers that give a clearer image as to what oil companies are really doing for energy innovation.
BPin¡¯, spendin¡¯ the Gs
In an ad by BP, they boast about their alternative energy program. The commercial has average Americans, like you and me, talking about alternative energy and wondering, "will it help anything?" Well, if you believe in crazy global warming, legal business cartels, and geopolitical Armageddon¡¯s, then, yes, alternative energy will help. But, moving past the seemingly uneducated people in the commercial, we go on to learn that, since 2005, BP has invested $7 billion in its alternative energy divisions, and plans to invest another $1 billion by 2015. If my math is correct, that's approximately an $8 billion investment over the course of 10 years for the oil giant.
In 2011, BP brought in around $375 billion in gross revenue. Net income was about $26 billion. The year before, BP lost money because of the oil spill. The year before that, the company made almost $17 billion in profit. If we divide up that aforementioned $8 billion over 10 years, that¡¯s $800 million a year, which, for 2011, would represent about 3% of profits for BP. Now, 3% isn¡¯t too bad, given that the company has billions to pay out to the families affected by the oil spill, the vast environmental damages it claims not to have made, and the various other legal implications of the Deep Water tragedy. But, at the end of the day, the company is devoting 3% of its after-tax resources to saving the planet. They are true champions of the human race.
Talking hourly rates
The big five oil companies -- BP, Chevron, Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE: RDS-A), ExxonMobil (NYSE: XOM), and ConocoPhilips (NYSE: COP) -- made a combined $341 million in profit, per day, during the first half of this year. That's roughly $236,000 per minute.
The American Society for Civil Engineers estimates that retooling the electric utilities sector towards solar, wind, and other alternatives, and the infrastructure associated with it, should cost $1.5 to $2 trillion by 2030. Two trillion dollars over 18 years is $111,111,111,111 per year, from now until then. That¡¯s less than half of one year¡¯s revenue for one of the big five oil companies.
It would take only 325 days of profit for all five combined to completely redo the U.S. electrical grid, making it more efficient, more reliable, and cheaper, while drastically reducing the enormous carbon footprint made daily by this country.
Now, of course, it's unreasonable to expect the big five to completely fund this mission. And estimated costs have a way of being ¡¦ estimates. Who knows what the cost would truly be at year 2030. But these figures are illustrations. They show us that the couple billion dollars here and there graciously offered up by big oil towards alternative energy is minuscule at most, and closer to offensively trivial.
The point is¡¦
Commenters may trash this as fuzzy math and manipulating isolated figures to prove a skewed point. Like I said, I don¡¯t expect five companies to save the country and the earth, and I don¡¯t expect them to singlehandedly cut themselves in half by making their own products obsolete.
But I have to laugh when I see these advertisements: Chevron working with farmers to find better ways to do their trade, for less cost and less harm to the land; BP helping rebuild the Gulf Coast while contributing billions to alternative fuel research. What BP doesn¡¯t seem to want to mention is that, last year, it shut down its 40-year old solar program because it wasn¡¯t making any money, even though the company profits millions every day.
I know you aren¡¯t going to save the world, oil companies, but don¡¯t treat us like the idiots most of us are. Trying to convince us that you are at the forefront of energy reform is like Jon Corzine telling us "I simply do not know where the money is." We may let you off the hook because we are too incompetent to do otherwise, but you¡¯re still completely full of garbage.



Before you consider Royal Dutch Shell plc, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Royal Dutch Shell plc wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



