The following video is from Friday's Investor Beat, in which host Chris Hill and analysts Ron Gross and James Early look at the hardest-hitting investing stories of the day.
In this segment, ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
) and Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) reported higher quarterly profits thanks to success in their refinery operations. ExxonMobil is once again the world's biggest public company. Which oil giant is the better bet for investors going forward? In this installment of Investor Beat, our analysts discuss the future of the two companies.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


The relevant video segment can be found between 3:28 and 4:49.

Based on the aggregated intelligence of 180,000-plus investors participating in Motley Fool CAPS, the Fool's free investing community, oil and gas giant Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) has earned a coveted five-star ranking.
With that in mind, let's take a closer look at Chevron and see what CAPS investors are saying about the stock right now.
Chevron facts
Headquarters (Founded)
San Ramon, Calif. (1879)
Market Cap
$228.0 billion
Industry
Integrated oil and gas
Trailing-12-Month Revenue
$224.8 billion
Management
Chairman/CEO John Watson
CFO Patricia Yarrington
Return on Equity (Average, Past 3 Years)
21.2%
Cash/Debt
$21.6 billion / $12.3 billion
Dividend Yield
3.1%
Competitors
BP (NYSE:BP
)
ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP
)
ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
)
SOURCES: S&P CAPITAL IQ AND MOTLEY FOOL CAPS.
On CAPS, 96% of the 4,235 members who have rated Chevron believe the stock will outperform the S&P 500 going forward.
Just last week, one of those Fools, hend6, succinctly summed up the Chevron bull case for our community: "Gargantuan company with great income year-over-year for the last few years, a strong balance sheet, continued share repurchases, a great dividend yield, and a slightly more diversified platform than other similarly large conglomerates."



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Want to see how well (or not so well) the stocks in this series are performing? Follow the TrackPoisedTo CAPS account.
