Yesterday's jitters have carried through to today's market session. Investors aren't getting a break from the Dow Jones Industrial Average's (DJINDICES:^DJI
) slump this week, as the blue-chip index has lost 86 points as of 2:25 p.m. EDT. Surprisingly, few of the Dow's member stocks have moved far in either direction, but with the significant majority of Dow stocks in the red, the index as a whole is tilting down.
Wall Street continues to fret about stimulus in the U.S. and in Japan, and questions about easing won't likely be answered soon. Let's look at how the biggest movers today are handling the Dow's downbeat session.
HP breaks out of the red
Hewlett-Packard (NYSE:HPQ
) ranks at the top of the index among a few members holding their ground in the green. The volatile stock has jumped 3.7% so far today after company CEO Meg Whitman told CNBC earlier today that the company's turnaround program is proceeding ahead of schedule. While Whitman admitted that her company still has far to go before it can dig itself out of its hole, she also said that revenue growth is possible at HP this year.
HP has expanded into data analytics and other growth areas recently as it looks to branch out from its core PC business. With the PC market under siege, investors have to hope that the firm's expansion away from that industry pays off -- otherwise, Whitman's cautious optimism may be delusion.
Fellow tech stock IBM (NYSE:IBM
) isn't having such a good day: Big Blue's shares have fallen 1.5% to rank among the top Dow laggards. The company is looking to cut costs by cutting employees, particularly after a worse-than-expected first quarter sunk the firm's stock by nearly 8% in one day back in April. The firm is planning to spend up to $1 billion on the cuts, which began today and could encompass up to 8,000 workers around the globe.
Energy stocks aren't much better off today. Two of Big Oil's top players are mired in the red: Shares of Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) and ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
) have fallen 1.2% and 0.7%, respectively. Chevron made waves today after the firm announced that it will sell its rights to two oil blocks off the Nigerian coast. Chevron hasn't begun production at either of the blocks, of which it is 40% owner and which are estimated to hold a combined 200 million barrels of oil. The company has performed well in Nigeria in recent years, producing some 238,000 barrels of crude oil daily in 2012.
Exxon, meanwhile, is headed to the Arctic. The company is prepared to set up an Arctic Research Center with Russian oil giant Rosneft near the Kara Sea in Russia. The joint establishment will allow Exxon and Rosneft to study environmental safety and protection while also allowing both firms to research improvements in efficiency and effectiveness in technology design. It'll cost around $200 million for Exxon, but considering that interest in Arctic energy-exploration remains high, it looks like money well spent for the company's future in deepwater drilling.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


A lack of positive economic data and nervous investors don't make a great mix. As market participants continue to worry about what the Federal Reserve may do with its stimulus programs, the markets are heading south this afternoon. As of 12:50 p.m. EDT the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI
) is down 63 points, or 0.41%, after opening up by more than 100 points this morning. The S&P 500 is lower by 0.44%, while the Nasdaq is down 0.65%.
A few Dow losers today
Shares of Verizon (NYSE:VZ
) are down 0.2% this afternoon on the news that Vodafone -- its joint-venture partner in Verizon Wireless -- has offered $9.6 billion for German cable television company Kabel Deutschland. Earlier reports have indicated that Kabel is not interested in that price, but this looks like a good place for the two companies to start talking. This is likely hurting Verizon because Vodafone has a 45% stake in Verizon Wireless, and this deal may put a higher price tag on that share if Verizon wants to make a buyout deal. 
Shares of IBM (NYSE:IBM
) have dropped 1% following a report that the company is battling with Amazon (NASDAQ:AMZN
) over a $600 million contract to setup the CIA's cloud-computing system. IBM has long been the go-to supplier for this type of service, but as Amazon has built its own systems and proven itself in the IT world over the past few years, Big Blue now has some formidable competition. To lose the contract would be a huge blow to IBM but an even bigger boon to Amazon. 
Shares of Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) are down 1% after the company announced that it would attempt to sell its rights to two offshore oil fields near Nigeria. That part of the world currently has a number of oil fields on the selling block, so it's unlikely that Chevron will receive a premium for the rights. A number of the world's largest oil companies have all been slowly moving out of the region, as Nigeria's government is involved in the area's oil business, and many have claimed that it is overrun with corruption.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


