Every investor would love to stumble upon the perfect stock. But will you ever really find a stock that provides everything you could possibly want?
One thing's for sure: You'll never discover truly great investments unless you actively look for them. Let's discuss the ideal qualities of a perfect stock and then decide whether Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) fits the bill.
The quest for perfection
Stocks that look great based on one factor may prove horrible elsewhere, making due diligence a crucial part of your investing research. The best stocks excel in many different areas, including these important factors:
With those factors in mind, let's take a closer look at Chevron.
Factor
What We Want to See
Actual
Pass or Fail?
Growth
5-year annual revenue growth > 15%
1.8%
Fail
1-year revenue growth > 12%
(5.8%)
Fail
Margins
Gross margin > 35%
28.1%
Fail
Net margin > 15%
11.8%
Fail
Balance sheet
Debt to equity < 50%
9.2%
Pass
Current ratio > 1.3
1.64
Pass
Opportunities
Return on equity > 15%
20.5%
Pass
Valuation
Normalized P/E < 20
7.89
Pass
Dividends
Current yield > 2%
3.1%
Pass
5-year dividend growth > 10%
9.2%
Fail
Total score
5 out of 10
SOURCE: S&P CAPITAL IQ. TOTAL SCORE = NUMBER OF PASSES.
Since we looked at Chevron last year, the company has lost a point for the second year in a row, as its revenue fell in 2012 compared with previous years. The stock has done reasonably well, though, rising 10% over the past year and recently hitting new highs.
The pressure on revenue that Chevron has seen lately has come from a combination of production pressures and weak energy prices that have plagued the entire industry. In its most recent quarter, for instance, ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
) reported declining production, even as Chevron managed to post a modest production increase. What saved both companies, though, was strength in their refining segments, with prices on gasoline, heating oil, and other distillates at extremely high levels compared with crude, especially inexpensive West Texas Intermediate.
But Chevron has been setting up a number of partnerships to exploit new production opportunities around the world. Last month, it signed a deal with China's CNOOC (OTC:CEO
) to explore the Pearl River Mouth Basin in the South China Sea, and just last week, Chevron confirmed that it will continue developing a field off the coast of Angola alongside partners that include Sonangol, Total (NYSE:TOT
), and Eni. Along with many other ventures, Chevron has the potential to see dramatic gains in oil and gas production from these plays.
One interesting speculation for future growth is the possibility that Chevron might buy out Chesapeake Energy (OTC:CHKA.Q
). With Chesapeake CEO Aubrey McClendon leaving the company, some believe that the stage is set for a buyout, and with a solid balance sheet, Chevron has the resources to pick up Chesapeake's huge range of natural gas assets.
For Chevron to improve, it needs to get revenue moving back in the right direction. Once that happens, a faster-growing dividend for the Dividend Aristocrat shouldn't be too hard to accomplish, helping Chevron move even closer to perfection.
Keep searching
No stock is a sure thing, but some stocks are a lot closer to perfect than others. By looking for the perfect stock, you'll go a long way toward improving your investing prowess and learning how to separate out the best investments from the rest.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Click here to add Chevron to My Watchlist, which can find all of our Foolish analysis on it and all your other stocks.
