Over the next couple of weeks John and David will be reviewing their real-money, 10-Bagger Portfolio. In this video, they take a closer look at ExxonMobil.
Despite some near-term challenges, ExxonMobil remains one of the best-managed energy companies in the world, and it¡¯s committed to returning capital to shareholders. Its latest quarterly results were surprisingly weak operationally. But the company has a diverse portfolio of global investments that will power earnings, and cash flow over the long term. Domestic natural gas continues to be a weakness, as prices remain low. Producers like Chesapeake Energy and Exco Resources are still feeling the stress. Competitor Devon Energy has made a big shift from gas to liquids as a result. What ExxonMobil has in its favor is that it¡¯s a diversified energy company. That¡¯s what helps the company generate so much cash flow that it can pay shareholders in the form of dividends and repurchases.
There are many different ways to play the energy sector, and our analysts have uncovered an under-the-radar company that's dominating its industry. This company is a leading provider of equipment and components used in  drilling and production operations, and poised to profit in a big way from it. To get the name and detailed analysis of this company that will prosper for years to come, check out our special free report: "The Only Energy Stock You'll Ever Need." Don't miss out on this limited-time offer and your opportunity to discover this under-the-radar company before the market does. Click here to access your report -- it's totally free.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



