The Attorney General's Office for the state of Utah announced this week that Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) has paid $1.8 million to settle allegations that the oil company unlawfully received a number of payments from the state's Petroleum Storage Tank Fund (PST).
The AG's Office said the PST made payments to Chevron to cover the costs of cleaning up spills from underground fuel storage tanks, despite the fact that Chevron had insurance that might have covered such costs. The AG's Office said it is satisfied with how the issue has been addressed and said that Chevron has "demonstrated a desire to be a responsible corporate citizen" over the years.
The AG's Office further noted that it has filed complaints in court against other oil companies, including ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP
), BP (NYSE:BP
), and Amoco, making similar allegations. "Utah is among several states seeking to recoup the state PST Fund monies paid for cleanups to oil companies who failed to disclose the existence of insurance," said Paul McConkie, assistant attorney general, in the state's news release.




Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



Now that 2012 is nearly in the rearview mirror, investors are beginning to sift through the market for the best stocks of the upcoming year. The future is plagued with uncertainty, but that has always been the case, and it has never stopped us from seeking out long-term values. One way to find those values is to look for companies with a long history of success. The Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI
) contains many such companies, but some are better investments than others.
Today we'll be taking a look at Chevron (NYSE:CVX
), a Dow component since 2008, to see whether its past-year performance holds some clues for 2013.
First-half recap
This hasn't been a great year for Chevron. It has consistently underperformed the Dow by a few percentage points almost all year, as you can see here:

CVX TOTAL RETURN PRICE DATA BY YCHARTS.
Here are a few financial snapshots of its recent performance:
Market Cap
$212.4 billion
P/E; Forward P/E
8.8; 8.6
Price to Free Cash Flow
28.9
TTM Revenue Growth
(2.6%)
TTM Net Income Growth
(11.1%)
TTM Free-Cash-Flow Growth
(52.9%)
MRQ Revenue
$58 billion
MRQ Net Income
$5.3 billion
MRQ Free Cash Flow
$5.6 billion
2013 Projected Growth Rate
(3.1%)
SOURCES: MORNINGSTAR, YAHOO! FINANCE AND YCHARTS. TTM = TRAILING 12 MONTHS. MRQ = MOST RECENT QUARTERLY.
What the numbers don't tell you
It's no wonder Chevron has had a hard time beating its index. Declining numbers across the board, which are projected to continue into 2013, do little to inspire investor confidence in the prospects of this oil supermajor. Declining production is an easy problem on which to pin Chevron's woes, but lower prices for both oil and natural gas have also put a kink in Chevron's cash-flow hose, so to speak.
Chevron has been running on all cylinders to stave off these problems, going after prime exploration acreage all over the globe. It has the go-ahead for a deepwater project off of West Africa that it's exploring together with Noble Energy (NASDAQ:NBL
), it has bought up a lot of Chesapeake Energy's (OTC:CHKA.Q
) assets in the Permian basin, it has expansion plans in both Indonesia and Lithuania, and it has also partnered with ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
) and Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.A
) (NYSE:RDS.B
) to develop a massive liquid-natural-gas project in Australia. That's a lot of activity to pursue in a few short months, but these are all fairly recent developments for Chevron.
Not all of Chevron's worldwide efforts have helped its financial picture. The company continues to fight litigation filed in Ecuador over environmental damage caused by Texaco, which became part of Chevron in 2001. Chevron has also gotten the proverbial smackdown in Brazil, where a (comparatively) small oil spill raised the ire of the country's politicians to a degree far greater than that seen after the devastating BP (NYSE:BP
) Deepwater Horizon disaster.
Chevron's many moving parts can be difficult to keep track of, but no matter how much Chevron pushes into new projects, it's ultimately going to be dependent on the price of energy commodities, which is more or less beyond its control. That's why it helps to have a lot of resources on hand to deal with any unexpected swings -- and this is one area in which Chevron excels. My fellow Fool David Lee Smith notes that Chevron has a lot of dry powder in its fortress-like balance sheet, which could be useful for any number of situations, whether entrenching for weaker prices or expanding to meet higher levels of global demand.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


