Investors got a reprieve on Tuesday as the major U.S. stock indexes staged a rally. The Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI) was up 7.7% at 11:25 a.m. EDT, rising back above the 20,000 level for the time being.
There hasn't been any good news on the novel coronavirus front. Cases and deaths continue to soar as more U.S. cities and states announce stricter measures to combat the virus. The U.S. now has over 46,000 confirmed cases and nearly 600 deaths, according to data from Johns Hopkins University.
Turning to individual stocks, both Intel (NASDAQ:INTC) and Chevron (NYSE:CVX) booked major gains. Intel was up despite the company suspending its share-buyback program, and Chevron soared after the company slashed its plans for capital spending.
Shares buybacks were all the rage as the market soared over the past few years. Now, with the novel coronavirus pandemic threatening to cause a severe contraction in the U.S. and global economies, companies are pulling back to preserve cash.
IMAGE SOURCE: INTEL.
Chip giant Intel is the latest company to put an end to share buybacks for the moment. The company announced via a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission on Tuesday that it was suspending its share-buyback program due to uncertainty surrounding the length and severity of the pandemic. Intel will continue to pay a dividend, and the company said that its factories continue to be operational. Intel has already used $7.6 billion of its $20 billion share-repurchase program announced late last year.
Intel sells processors that power PCs and servers, and demand for both could slump as the global economy enters recession. At the end of February, IDC predicted that global PC shipments would decline by 7.1% in 2020 because of the pandemic. In the server chip business, if any large cloud computing providers pull back on expansion plans, sales in Intel's data center group would suffer.
On top of weaker demand in the coming months, Intel faces increased competition from Advanced Micro Devices. AMD now offers PC and server chips that are highly competitive. Intel has already been forced to cut prices, both directly and indirectly through new product lines.
Intel stock was up about 6.8% late Tuesday morning as the broader market rallied. Shares are still down roughly 24% from their 52-week high.
Shares of Chevron were up big on Tuesday after the oil major announced plans to slash its 2020 capital spending plan. Chevron stock was up 13.3% by late morning, erasing some its losses over the past few weeks.
A steep decline in oil prices has led Chevron to take steps to preserve cash. The company now plans to spend $16 billion this year on organic capital and exploratory spending, a 20% reduction. Upstream unconventionals will see a $2 billion reduction; upstream projects and exploration spending will be cut by $700 million; upstream base business spending will see a $500 million cut; and downstream, chemical, and other will have spending reduced by $800 million.
Chevron now expects roughly flat production in 2020, excluding recent asset sales and price-related contractual effects. In the Permian Basin, Chevron expects production to be 20% below prior guidance by the end of the year.
On top of cutting capital spending, Chevron has suspended its share-repurchase program. The company also remains on track to reduce run-rate operating costs by more than $1 billion this year.
While Chevron stock is having a good day on Tuesday, shares remain down 52% from their 52-week high.



Before you consider Intel Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Intel Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


At its annual meeting with analysts on March 3, 2020, Chevron (NYSE:CVX) announced a five-year plan with the potential to distribute more than $75 billion to shareholders. Included in that plan was $5 billion in annual share repurchases and rising dividends, as well as approximately $20 billion per year in capital spending.
But that plan was predicated on the idea that oil prices would stay in the neighborhood of $60 a barrel.
Now, much lower oil prices prevail, global economies are reeling from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the company has revised its five-year plan dramatically. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Chevron now says that it will reduce its capital spending this year by 20%, or $4 billion. It also cut its guidance for production in the Permian Basin by 20% and suspended its share buybacks. The company stressed, however, that the dividend would not be affected. 
"Given the decline in commodity prices, we are taking actions expected to preserve cash, support our balance sheet strength, lower short-term production, and preserve long-term value," said CEO Michael Wirth.
With crude oil prices now at about half the energy company's previous $60 per barrel target level, Chevron will lower its production, primarily in the Permian Basin. About half of its capital spending cuts will come there, with the balance spread across its portfolio, where the belt-tightening will impact upstream projects and exploration as well as downstream and chemical businesses. 
The company said it continues to move ahead with its efforts to cut operating costs by more than $1 billion in 2020. It also noted that due to the rapidly changing and uncertain environment, there could be material impacts to its future results. 



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Dual system shocks have upended the energy market in recent weeks. The COVID-19 outbreak is grinding the global economy to a halt, which is causing energy demand to crater. At the same time, oil supplies are surging because of the collapse of OPEC's production support agreement with Russia.
These two issues have torpedoed energy stocks. Oil giant Chevron (NYSE:CVX) has tumbled more than 50% in recent weeks, while renewable energy producer NextEra Energy Partners (NYSE:NEP) has plunged more than 30%. Those sell-offs likely have investors wondering which of these high-yielding energy stocks is the better buy right now. Here's a look at the case for and against buying either one.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The price of crude oil has cratered more than 50% this year and was recently trading in the low $20s. That's well below the worst-case scenario most oil producers could have envisioned. And now Chevron is considering changes to its operating plan just weeks after affirming its strategy, which assumed oil would average $55 a barrel in the coming years. 
It's not yet clear what Chevron will do, other than possibly reducing its capital spending plan from its current range of $19 billion-$22 billion per year through 2024. Given its strong balance sheet, the company will probably be able to continue paying its dividend, which has seen its yield rise above 9% following the plunge in its stock price over the past few weeks. While that's an attractive income stream, the company can't sustain that payout forever on the cash flows produced at $20 oil.
On one hand, Chevron's stock has massive upside from here if oil prices recover, which is certainly possible once the COVID-19 outbreak fades, and Russia and Saudi Arabia end their price war. However, if the pandemic permanently destroys oil demand and the price war between Russia and Saudi Arabia doesn't stop, then Chevron's stock could have further to fall. It also might eventually need to reduce its dividend. On top of those near-term concerns, the long-term outlook for oil demand is growing more questionable as the global economy continues to transition to cleaner sources.
NextEra Energy Partners stands to benefit from that continued pivot toward clean energy, since it focuses on generating renewable electricity and operating natural gas pipelines. However, it still has taken a beating during the energy market meltdown, despite its lack of exposure to the oil market. The sell-off has pushed the yield on the company's dividend up above 6%.
That high-yielding payout, however, seems to be on a more sustainable footing than Chevron's because NextEra Energy Partners has much less volatility in its cash flow. That's because it sells the renewable power it generates via long-term, fixed-rate contracts, while the gas pipelines it operates also produce stable fee-based income. Meanwhile, the company only pays out about 70% of its cash flow through its dividend, which provides it with a bit of a cushion.  
If there is one concern with NextEra Energy Partners, it's that it doesn't have the balance sheet strength of Chevron, which has one of the highest credit ratings in the energy market. However, it does have the backing of top utility NextEra Energy (NYSE:NEE), which has one of the best credit profiles in the electric utility space. That relationship leads NextEra Energy Partners to believe it can grow its high-yielding dividend by 12% to 15% per year through 2024 as it acquires additional clean energy assets from its parent. 
While Chevron's stock has fallen further and it offers a higher yield, it's not yet clear what the future holds for the oil market. Crude prices could remain low for a long time, which might force Chevron to reduce its dividend.
NextEra Energy Partners, on the other hand, has minimal volatility in its cash flow thanks to the long-term, fixed-rate contracts it has in place. That puts its dividend on a much more sustainable footing. Add to that the visible upside ahead in the renewable energy sector, and NextEra Energy Partners looks like the better buy right now.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


