Leading energy companies ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and Chevron (NYSE:CVX) are no strangers to the merger-and-acquisition market. Both have made big splashes over the years, which has enabled them to grow to their current size. While they haven't completed a notable acquisition in a few years, they're looking for their next deal.
That was evident in the comments from executives at both companies at a recent industry conference. And that's why investors shouldn't be surprised if either one makes a big move in the coming year.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Chevron has already tried making a big splash. It stunned the oil market earlier this year by bidding $33 billion to acquire Anadarko Petroleum. While Anadarko would have been a perfect strategic fit for Chevron, Occidental Petroleum (NYSE:OXY) fought aggressively to gain control of Anadarko and its position in the Permian Basin. Occidental prevailed, which left Chevron to walk away with a $1 billion breakup fee.
Despite that ordeal, Chevron remains open to acquisitions. "We're always looking," stated Jeff Gustavson, the VP of its Mid-Continent business, at a recent industry conference. The company aims to take an "opportunistic" approach, he said, since it's not under "any pressure to transact." That's because Chevron has plenty of fuel to grow production and shareholder returns in the near term. However, if it found the right deal to accelerate its ability to create value, it wouldn't hesitate to pursue that opportunity.
Exxon, meanwhile, hasn't made a notable deal since it bought privately held Bass in early 2017 for $5.6 billion. That deal doubled Exxon's resources in the Permian Basin, giving it the fuel to grow its production in that region at an accelerated pace in the coming years.
Thanks to that deal and its needle-moving offshore Guyana development, Exxon is on track to more than double its earnings and cash flow by 2025 with no improvement in oil prices. However, that doesn't mean the company won't consider an acquisition. CEO Darren Woods told investors at a recent industry conference that "if there is the opportunity to acquire something that brings unique value to ExxonMobil, we'll be in a position to transact on that." The company is keeping what he called a "watchful eye" for deals given the slump in the stock prices of Permian-focused producers in the past year. However, while the company expects further industry consolidation in the region, it's not in a rush to make a deal, with Woods noting that "time's on our side."
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
While drillers focused on the Permian Basin have undergone some consolidation in recent years, there is still a long list of companies focused on the region. And that means Exxon and Chevron have plenty of options.
When Chevron made its initial bid to buy Anadarko, analysts quickly speculated on which targets would be next. An analyst at Tudor Pickering, for example, thought leading Permian drillers Pioneer Natural Resources (NYSE:PXD) or Concho Resources (NYSE:CXO) would be ideal fits for ExxonMobil, as they'd help plug a hole in its portfolio. That analyst also thought Royal Dutch Shell might feel pressure to add to its Permian acreage and could acquire smaller Permian drillers like WPX Energy or Cimarex Energy. An analyst at BP Capital, meanwhile, thought EOG Resources, Parsley Energy, or Occidental Petroleum could be targets for big oil players looking to bulk up on the Permian -- though Occidental would make sure it wasn't one by going on the offensive and acquiring Anadarko. 
While big oil companies have plenty of options, that doesn't mean they'll make a deal anytime soon, since there's a disconnect between what they're willing to pay and what sellers believe their companies are worth. This value disconnect is leading many Permian drillers to start buying back their shares to help narrow the gap. Pioneer Natural Resources, for example, has already spent more than $500 million to repurchase about 2% of its outstanding shares. It plans to aggressively buy back its stock in the coming quarters since they continue to lose value despite its strong operations and growing free cash flow. Concho Resources, meanwhile, recently sold an asset so that it could jump-start a share repurchase program given the slide in its stock this year. However, if these buyback plans don't work in boosting share prices, then these drillers might be more willing to consider selling.
ExxonMobil and Chevron have both made it clear that they'd like to boost their position in the Permian Basin if the right deal comes along. While they plan to be patient, there are so many potential acquisition targets in the region that it seems likely one will eventually be willing to sell. That's something investors should keep an eye on, since a needle-moving deal could help accelerate either company's already attractive growth prospects.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


The past year has been a wild ride for oil prices and investors in oil stocks. Brent crude prices topped $85 a barrel in late 2018 before crashing to end the year at about $50. Then they rose again through May, to more than $70, before easing back down again. Currently, they're sitting below $60. Not great, but not terrible.
With all of this volatility, what's an oil investor to do? We approached three of our Motley Fool contributors to ask what oil stocks they think are good buys in the current environment. They came back with Casey's General Stores (NASDAQ:CASY), Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.A)(NYSE:RDS.B), and Chevron (NYSE:CVX). Here's why they think these oil stocks are worth a look right now.
EVEN THE BEST OIL STOCKS HAVE UNDERPERFORMED LATELY, THANKS TO VOLATILE OIL PRICES. IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Travis Hoium (Casey's General Stores): We know that electric vehicles are coming to the auto industry, but that hasn't stopped oil consumption from rising as bigger vehicles become more popular with consumers. One of the beneficiaries is Casey's General Stores, which operates primarily in small towns and rural communities. 
Casey's has the advantage of rising oil consumption overall, but it won't be affected by an energy transition until long after many of its competitors are. More rural communities don't have the infrastructure for increased electric or hydrogen vehicles, and the high-performance trucks that are popular there are a long way from seeing internal combustion being replaced. 
What isn't going to change is the strength of non-fuel in the convenience store side of the business. In fiscal 2020, management expects grocery and other merchandise same store sales to rise 2.5% to 4% while prepared food is expected to grow 3% to 6%. All that while gallons of fuel sold are expected to be flat. 
Casey's stock is expensive today, trading at 30 times trailing earnings and paying just a 0.8% dividend yield, but it has relatively little competition and a lot of stability in the energy business. That's what I'm looking for from an oil stock today even if I have to pay up to get it. 
John Bromels (Royal Dutch Shell): The past year hasn't just been rough for oil prices; it's also been bad for the oil industry as a whole. As measured by the SPDR S&P Oil and Gas Exploration & Production ETF, the industry has lost nearly half its market value over the past year. However, oil major Royal Dutch Shell is bucking that trend, with its stock down only 14.4% in the same period.
Much of that drop came after Shell reported a rare disappointing quarter on Aug. 1. While operating cash flow was up 16% year over year, net income fell by a frightening 50%, to $3.0 billion. Shell blamed "lower realized oil, gas, and LNG prices" and "weaker realized chemicals and refining margins" for the hit. In past quarters, Shell seemed oddly immune to fluctuating energy prices, but the macro environment seems to have finally caught up with the company.
The good news for investors is that the stock's valuation seems to be at five-year lows. Shell's price-to-earnings ratio is now just 11.3, easily the lowest among the oil majors, while its dividend yield of 6.7% is the highest. And as long as the company can keep churning out cash, investors should have no qualms about the stability of that dividend. 
Nobody knows where oil prices are headed, but in a volatile time for the industry, investing in stability may be the best strategy. That's why Royal Dutch Shell looks like a good choice for oil investors now. 
Rich Smith (Chevron): With the price of oil down 27% since October, you might expect that oil companies would be struggling to make a buck these days. In some cases, you'd be right. ExxonMobil, for example, is currently generating only about $0.64 for every $1 it claims to be "earning" as net income. But in other cases, you'd be wrong.
Chevron stock is one of the latter cases.
With total free cash flow of $18.5 billion generated over the past 12 months, Chevron is more profitable than meets the eye, churning out $1.25 in real cash profit for every $1 it reports as accounting profit on its income statement. Chevron's using that cash to pay a big dividend -- 4.1%, so about twice what the average S&P 500 stock pays -- and to buy back stock as well, totaling about $4 billion to $5 billion a year.
The result of this shareholder-friendly cash deployment is that earnings are compounding among a shrinking share count, growing faster than they would if the share count remained constant. Between the 4% divvy, 6% projected earnings growth, and buybacks boosting per-share profits by another 2% or so per year, Chevron stock is now on pace to generate 12% annual returns to its shareholders -- not bad at all for a stock trading for a mere 12 times free cash flow.



Before you consider Royal Dutch Shell plc, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Royal Dutch Shell plc wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


