In today's video, Joel discusses SandRidge and the potential upside the company has as it strengthens its balance sheet while doubling oil production. In addition to increasing liquidity, SandRidge is positioned to grow its bottom line as it develops its inexpensive, low-carbonate assets. Check out the video below for more information on the company and see if it's a good fit for your portfolio.
SandRidge is emerging from its difficult past and is halfway through its ambitious three-year plan to profitability. If you would like to find out more about the strengths and weaknesses of the company, you should view this brand-new premium report detailing SandRidge's plan and what to expect from the company going forward. To get started, click here! 



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



Over the next couple of weeks John and David will be reviewing their real-money 10-Bagger Portfolio. In this video, they take a closer look at Solazyme.
It was an up-and-down quarter for Solazyme, with a little more up than down from a business standpoint. Unfortunately, some development revenue from the Department of Defense is going to dry up. However, the company continues to receive development revenue from companies like Dow Chemical, Chevron, and Unilever. Solazyme also continues to make progress in its health/beauty and nutritional segments. Its partnerships with Roquette and Bunge are progressing, and investments are being made in future manufacturing capacity. The company is also working to develop different kinds of oils for different purposes and different markets. But these are mostly options at this point. John and David have taken a very small position based on the progress Solazyme continues to make. This stock is not for every portfolio, as it is rather speculative.
There are many different ways to play the energy sector, and our analysts have uncovered an under-the-radar company that's dominating its industry. This company is a leading provider of equipment and components used in drilling and production operations, and poised to profit in a big way from it. To get the name and detailed analysis of this company that will prosper for years to come, check out our special free report: "The Only Energy Stock You'll Ever Need." Don't miss out on this limited-time offer and your opportunity to discover this company before the market does. Click here to access your report -- it's totally free.



Before you consider DuPont de Nemours, Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and DuPont de Nemours, Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



