Earnings once again took center stage on Wall Street Friday, as favorable results from a host of companies, including Microsoft and General Electric, boosted investor sentiment going into the weekend. European markets also stabilized going into a key election in France. Just before 2:45 p.m. EDT, the Dow Jones Industrials (INDEX: ^DJI) were off their highs but still up 87 points to 13,051. The S&P 500 (INDEX: ^GSPC) jumped almost 6 points to 1,383.
But not all stocks shared in the rally today. Bank of America (NYSE: BAC) was down more than 4% in early afternoon trade as CLSA analyst Mike Mayo gave the bank a sell rating. Although the stock has had a huge run so far in 2012, Mayo argues that even if it successfully emerges from its plans to recapitalize and rebuild, B of A will likely never return to the status it once held.
Among the Dow's energy stocks, both ExxonMobil (NYSE: XOM) and Chevron (NYSE: CVX) were somewhat higher as oil prices climbed to around $103 per barrel. Natural gas, however, continues to languish at about $1.92, pulling diversified energy producers like Exxon and Chevron in two different directions. Longer-term, both stocks' prospects rely on the global economic picture. A slowdown could cause energy prices to plunge, but a recovery might well increase demand and sustain prices near current levels.
All earnings, all the time
We're nowhere near done with earnings season, and you can't afford to miss the news that your companies give you. Get the latest scoop in The Motley Fool's latest special report, which identifies five stocks that investors simply have to watch this earnings season. Let me give you a free invitation to read the report free by clicking here -- but be sure to act now, before these companies report.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



