Retirement generally means shifting from building your nest egg to living off of your nest egg, which alters the way you have to think about investing. So, if you are retired, you'll likely want to own relatively low-risk stocks that pay generous dividends. Here are two that you should consider today, even though they are in out-of-favor sectors.
Owning property in the age of COVID-19 is difficult, with some real estate investment trust (REIT) sectors getting hit particularly hard (think retail assets). That's why W.P. Carey (NYSE:WPC) stands out. It is one of the most diversified REITs that investors can buy. The landlord's portfolio is spread across industrial (24% of rent), office (23%), warehouse (22%), retail (17%), self storage (5%), and other (the rest). It also generates around a third of its rent roll from Europe. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
The benefit of this diversification was apparent in April -- while some REITs were having trouble collecting rent, 95% of W.P. Carey's tenants paid up. That's left the company in a very strong position relative to peers, some of which are simply hoping to muddle through the current rough patch. For example, while many REITs have been cutting their dividends, W.P. Carey just increased its payout (albeit by a token amount). In fact, the company's top brass is looking at the broad economic downturn as an opportunity to invest in new properties. The company has a history of zigging while the world zags. 
If that sounds like an interesting opportunity, then you'll also want to take a look at the REIT's generous 6.2% yield. Backing that dividend up is over two decades of annual dividend increases. If you can handle the idea of owning a company that charts its own course, W.P. Carey is worth a deep dive today. 
W.P. Carey is easy to like when you dig into the story a bit, but it's harder to like the next name, energy giant Chevron (NYSE:CVX). The big negative today is low oil prices, which aren't likely to recover until there's a sustained economic recovery from COVID-19. That could take some time, and there's likely to be a lot of choppiness along the way.
That's actually one of the reasons Chevron stands out. It has a stronger balance sheet than any of its closest peers, a fact that should allow it to muddle through this rough patch in relative stride. The company's financial debt to equity ratio was a modest 0.25 times at the end of the first quarter, well below those of most peers.

CVX FINANCIAL DEBT TO EQUITY (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS
This suggests that Chevron will be able to continue its over-three-decade-long streak of dividend hikes by leaning on its balance sheet until oil prices recover. Basically, it should be able to outlast smaller, weaker players that are increasingly turning to bankruptcy to help deal with their burdensome debt loads.
But what about the future? Oil is a dirty fuel that is being replaced by cleaner sources. That's true, but energy transitions take a long time to unfold because technology and infrastructure have to be developed and put in place. Oil is likely to remain vital to the global energy picture for years to come. 
That's why Chevron focuses less on short-term price swings and more on the long-term supply/demand dynamics. Yes, COVID-19-related economic shutdowns have upended near-term industry dynamics, but the long term is a different story. Oil is still a very important global fuel. Investors, however, have put even the strongest names, like Chevron, in the Wall Street dog house. Chevron's nearly-6% yield, easily near the highest levels in the company's history, is proof of that.
It takes a strong stomach to step in when others are fearful, but that's often a time when you can pick up great values. All in, financially strong Chevron looks like it's on sale today.
Neither W.P. Carey nor Chevron is easy to love right now. But that's exactly why they offer such generous dividend yields. If you take some time to understand the long-term stories here, you'll likely realize they are worth your attention. Both have pretty desirable positions within their respective industries that set them apart from the peers they are being lumped in with. Meanwhile, you can collect their fat dividends while you wait for investors to realize that these companies are a cut above the rest.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


The energy sector has gained the distinction of the most-hated market sector over the last few years. Excess oil supply coupled with plummeting demand resulted in oil prices briefly falling into negative territory. However, the latest developments give a glimmer of hope to this seemingly gloomy sector. Three key reasons make oil stocks attractive right now.
After some real tough months, U.S. economic activity is showing a nice pick-up. One of the key indicators reflecting the growth is the unemployment rate. The unemployment rate in the non-farm segment fell to 11.1% in June from 14.7% in April, according to the Department of Labor. The U.S. economy added a notable 4.8 million jobs in June.
Similarly, U.S. retail sales rose 17.7% in May from April, according to advance estimates. Even though the May sales were 6.1% lower than in May 2019, sales improved significantly from the previous month. In particular, auto sales rose an impressive 44% from April and were down just 3.9% compared to May 2019. Globally as well, the economic activity is picking up, though the countries are at different stages of recovery. China, in particular, has seen a steep recovery, recording a year-over-year growth in car sales in May.  
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The above data is a clear indication of recovering economic activity, which is boosting the demand for oil and oil products.
As shelter-at-place orders have eased, more people are using vehicles to go to their workplaces and places of leisure. At the same time, demand for oil products to transport goods is recovering as industries resume operations. Overall, the demand for oil products is recovering as economic activity is picking up, not only in the U.S. but globally as well. Oil demand in China recovered to nearly the year-ago levels in April itself. Similarly, the demand in India recovered in May, though it's still down year-over-year. Looking at the global trends in easing of lock-down measures, the International Energy Agency expects a boost in oil demand in the second-half of the year.  

US FINISHED MOTOR GASOLINE PRODUCT SUPPLIED DATA BY YCHARTS
As the above graph shows, gasoline demand has recovered to 8.6 million barrels per day in the week ending June 26 from a low of 5.1 million barrels per day for the week ending April 3. 
Oil stocks are trading at much lower levels compared to the start of the year. The S&P Energy Select Sector Index is down 37% year to date. The fall in energy stock prices pushed yields higher, making them extremely attractive. However, investors need to exercise caution while buying energy stocks.
Even if demand for oil and oil products recovers to pre-COVID levels, excess global supply will likely keep a lid on oil prices. U.S. companies need to find ways to operate profitably at sustained low oil prices -- a key focus for most oil companies currently. However, this transition may take years. Oil stock prices may remain pressured in the meantime.
All of this also means that companies that fail to bring down their costs of production, that are highly leveraged, or that do not have diversified operations may not survive long if oil prices remain suppressed. So, it is important to select stocks of companies that have conservative leverage and diversified operations.
Two such stocks are Chevron (NYSE:CVX) and Phillips 66 (NYSE:PSX). Integrated giant Chevron has the lowest leverage among its peers.

CVX DEBT TO CAPITAL (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS
For 2019, Chevron's dividend break-even was at $55 per barrel.  The company is taking steps to bring this down. During its annual stockholder meeting in May, Chevron also noted that even if Brent crude oil prices -- the international benchmark -- remain under $30 per barrel for two years, it intends to maintain its dividends by reducing share repurchases and capital and operating expenses and using borrowed funds. Whether it does that remains to be seen. However, the company is better positioned than its peers to lean on its balance sheet if needed.
Another company set to benefit from a recovery in demand for gasoline and other oil products is top refiner Phillips 66. Its midstream operations provide it with earnings diversity as well. With a debt-to-capital ratio of 38%, Phillips 66's leverage is under control. Overall, the company looks well placed to weather the temporary demand destruction due to COVID-19 while maintaining payouts.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


