Shares of globally diversified integrated energy company ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) fell more than 7% as the trading day began on June 11. Peer Chevron (NYSE:CVX) followed, dropping as much as 6.7% in the first half hour on Wall Street. To a large degree, these declines tracked the broader market, where the S&P 500 Index fell dramatically on concerns that the U.S. recovery from COVID-19 and the economic impacts of the effort to slow the coronavirus' spread weren't going to be as swift as expected in recent days.
And yet there's more of a story to tell in the oil patch.
An economic recovery is vital for the energy sector if oil prices are to recover, and that will depend partially on how quickly the world moves past, or at least learns to deal with, COVID-19. So bad news on both of these fronts isn't good for Exxon or Chevron. Indeed, the U.S. Federal Reserve's recent economic comments were hardly uplifting (the need to keep rates low for longer is a bad omen), and neither was the news of rising coronavirus cases in states that have reopened for business.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
So it's hardly a surprise that oil prices cratered at the open of trading on June 11. Since Exxon and Chevron's top and bottom lines are both tied directly to the commodity, they fell.
However, the dramatic price action in Chesapeake Energy's (OTC:CHKA.Q) stock tells just how crazy things have gotten in the energy market. Chesapeake's shares fell 16% at the open but were up nearly 30% by 10:15 a.m. EDT and quickly fell back down to a gain of "just" 13% by 10:30 a.m. This is a company that, for months, has looked like it is close to declaring bankruptcy. In fact, after the close on June 8, Bloomberg, citing sources close to the situation, said a Chapter 11 filing could happen any day.
Chesapeake plunged the next two days. That, however, followed a massive price run-up the two days before on news that OPEC had agreed to extend production cuts and that U.S. onshore drillers were starting to reopen closed wells. Investors are clearly vacillating between risk on and risk off, with what appears to be a healthy dose of gambling thrown in with regard to high-risk names.
It's important to remember that stockholders are usually wiped out during a bankruptcy, so investors buying Chesapeake here are speculating at best. But Chesapeake isn't the only oil stock that's seeing crazy gyrations, as many of the onshore U.S. drillers have witnessed dramatic price swings over the last week.
Exxon and Chevron, by comparison, have been relatively stable. That said, the price moves these giants experienced today are material for large integrated oil majors. By 10:30 a.m., their losses had moderated to between 4% and 5%.
The relatively gloomy view that Wall Street has taken over the last few days is probably a healthy dose of reality. While OPEC extending production cuts is good news, OPEC members have a bad habit of ignoring the quotas to which they agree. Increasing U.S. production as shuttered wells are reopened, meanwhile, could offset any benefit from OPEC's cuts. If COVID-19 sees a resurgence, a weak U.S. economy (which is the largest in the world) could continue to struggle and retard a demand recovery.
Meanwhile, there's a significant amount of oil in storage that still needs to be worked off, and it continues to be a major headwind to a sustained rise in oil prices. The painful mismatch between supply and demand is not solved by any stretch of the imagination. Oil and the companies associated with the industry are still struggling to deal with very real issues.

XOM FINANCIAL DEBT TO EQUITY (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS.
And this doesn't even consider the company-by-company factors that investors also need to look at. Chesapeake, with a heavy debt load, is a prime example. To be fair, giants Exxon and Chevron have among the strongest balance sheets in the energy sector. Both Exxon and Chevron, for reference, have sizable investments in onshore U.S. drilling assets, if that's an oil region of interest. All in all, investors looking to invest in energy would be better served taking a risk on these two giants than a smaller, financially weak player like Chesapeake. But even then, neither Chevron nor Exxon can be viewed as a low-risk investment today. There are just too many moving parts and too many uncertainties.
The energy sector is, in normal times, prone to large and swift price changes. Over the last week, those price moves have become even more pronounced. Most investors would probably be better off stepping back and watching the fireworks here. If you feel the need to own an oil company, sticking to financially strong giants like Chevron and Exxon is probably a better idea than betting that smaller companies with material leverage will turn out to be winners.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


OPEC has agreed to extend production cuts, which energy investors expect to help correct the painfully out-of-balance global supply/demand equation. That's got oil prices up off their recent lows and energy stocks moving higher again. But there's something else going on in the industry that investors need to consider that could limit the growth of energy companies both large and small. Here's what you need to watch, and how you should think about it.
Oil and natural gas are commodities prone to dramatic and frequent price moves. All it takes is a bit of news and prices can soar or collapse, often taking the share prices of energy industry giants like ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and Chevron (NYSE:CVX) higher or lower. The stocks of smaller players like Chesapeake Energy (OTC:CHKA.Q) and Matador Energy (NYSE:MTDR) are usually impacted even more.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
There's a mismatch here that's important to recognize, though. Oil majors like Chevron frequently explain to investors that they don't pay all that much attention to near-term energy price moves, preferring to focus on the long-term supply and demand equation in the energy sector. That isn't to suggest that near-term price changes don't have an impact -- the current low oil prices have led Chevron to reduce its capital spending plans as it attempts to balance cash going out the door with cash coming in. However, Chevron still sees a bright long-term future for oil, as does Exxon. So while these companies are pulling back, they are keeping their eyes on the long term and still spending. 
Smaller players are pulling back, too, but the impact on their businesses can be more dramatic, particularly when it comes to onshore U.S. drilling. That's because non-conventional wells tend to produce a lot of oil up front, but the flow slows quite quickly to a trickle. In order to keep production growing, unconventional drillers need to keep drilling. Exxon and Chevron have diversified businesses, mixing short-cycle assets (like unconventional U.S. wells) and longer-cycle assets (like offshore wells), along with material downstream businesses that add even more variety to the cash flow stream. 
Put simply, the bigger players can not only afford to spend more even during difficult times, but they also have business profiles that allow greater flexibility. But that brings up the bad news that's taking shape in the energy market, despite rising oil prices.
This down cycle in the oil sector has been particularly brutal due to a combination of factors, including the long-term increase in U.S. onshore production, an ill-timed price war between OPEC and partner Russia, and the demand drop off related to the global effort to slow the spread of COVID-19. It got so bad that oil prices briefly fell below zero, which, in theory, means that oil drillers were paying customers to take oil off of their hands. And there's still a huge glut of oil sitting in storage that needs to be worked off before a sustained price increase can really take hold.

XOM DATA BY YCHARTS
That's where the "bad news is good news" factor comes in. Generally speaking, pulling back on capital spending means slower production growth for oil companies. For an onshore U.S. driller that can quickly lead to production declines. So it's terrible for onshore U.S. drillers that the number of rigs operating in the United States today is near historic lows. This isn't a small issue -- the current active rig count is now about 80% below the peak levels seen in 2012.
Drillers are pulling back very hard, and that will have material implications for their individual businesses. But with cash flow weak because of low oil prices, there really hasn't been much of a choice. Indeed, some companies in the U.S. onshore space are already going bankrupt, and more are likely to follow. 
However, from a big-picture point of view, fast-growing U.S. production was one of the factors that led to an oversupply of oil in the first place. So a material pullback in onshore drilling will actually help speed up the process of getting supply and demand back in balance. Add in OPEC's production cuts and the outlook starts to look even brighter on the supply side of things. On the demand side, there's still a lot of excess oil sitting in storage to work off -- but with economies around the world starting to reopen, the need for oil is again getting back to more normal levels. So a steep drop in drilling is bad news on the one hand, but on the other it's exactly what the oil market needs.
As you watch the news in the energy sector, be careful to think about the long-term supply/demand equation like the energy giants do. That's what matters, and what will really determine what is good news and what is bad news. On that score, a drop in drilling in the U.S., a key source of oversupply in the global market, is very good news, even if it means that there's likely to be a shake up in the sector. In fact, a few more bankruptcies might actually be a benefit, too, if they foster more rational long-term drilling plans. On the negative side, what you'll want to watch out for is a material uptick in energy prices leading to a material uptick in U.S. drilling, as that could start a brand new down cycle again. All in, as an investor today, you should probably focus your attention on companies that have proven they can manage through volatile periods like this, like the integrated giants. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


