After posting a relatively decent earnings report in the prior quarter, Chevron's (NYSE:CVX) investors were anticipating a bit of a breakout this past quarter. After all, this was the same quarter where we saw OPEC's decision to cut production and drilling activity in the U.S. has started to pick back up. 
This wasn't necessarily the case, though. Thanks to a few income hampering events -- some expected, some not -- Chevron's earnings were rather muted. Here's a quick rundown of Chevron's results, what happened in the quarter, and what investors can expect in 2017.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
DATA SOURCE: CHEVRON EARNINGS RELEASE. *IN MILLIONS, EXCEPT PER-SHARE DATA. 
Chevron put together a pretty strong prior quarter considering the prices for oil and gas at the time. In fact, last quarter was the first time where we really got to see the results of management's efforts to cut costs. This quarter was a continuation of that work to a certain degree, as evidenced by its U.S. upstream business segment posting an earnings gain for the first time since the fourth quarter of 2014.
Also, keep in mind that the average realized natural gas price for its international upstream was lower this past quarter than in the prior quarter. While Chevron is heavily levered to oil production as a percentage of its overall mix, more than 80% of its natural gas production comes from overseas. So the fact that its international upstream segment was able to post earnings despite rather flat price realizations is a sign that things are improving for the production side of the business.
Those gains were offset, though, by some expected weakness in its downstream business coupled with $872 million in corporate charges compared to $238 million in charges this time last year. 
DATA SOURCE: CHEVRON EARNINGS RELEASE. AUTHOR'S CHART.
Cash generation continues to be a struggle for Chevron. While it was able to almost cover all of its capital spending for the quarter with operational cash flow, it still came up short in meeting its dividend payments and resorted to issuing $500 million in debt and another $600 million in asset sales. For 2016, the company was $15.5 billion short in meeting its cash flow needs.
On top of announcing its capital budget for the coming year, Chevron's management also guided for capital spending for the next four years to come in roughly between $17 billion and $22 billion. On the conference call, one analyst pointed out that more than $2 billion is still dedicated to two major projects -- Gorgon and Wheatstone LNG -- that are expected to be complete by 2018. So when asked what the company plans to do with that spending in the coming years, CEO John Watson pointed out some of the opportunities in today's price environment, with a big focus on shale:
I would expect that we would see an increase in unconventional spending. We've talked about ramping up the Permian, and I think that'll be the case. We're budgeting about $2 billion this year, but you could easily see another $1 billion there. We have very little activity in the Marcellus now. I would -- we've gotten very efficient there, but we would expect better market conditions and offtake capability there. We've made good progress in the Duvernay, Argentina. So just in the shale and tight area, you could see some increases. But again, that's short-cycle, high-return activity.
Now we do have some opportunities in the portfolio that if we continue to make good progress on concepts and sort of delineation drilling, things like Anchor and Tigris, and we've highlighted Rosebank and a few others. So we have a good queue of projects, but we need to make sure that those have kind of the right economics associated with them, that -- but all of that can comfortably fit in the range that we've talked about. But I'll just say that if we're at $50 to $55, you should expect spending to go down next year.
No cyclical recovery is going to go in a straight line, and this past quarter was a bit of a blip on that recovery trend. If we we take out some of the expected items like turnaround work at Richmond, though, it looks as though the company is on the right track. As always, the concern for Chevron is to get to cash flow breakeven. For the past two years now, the company has been saying that this is the year we can expect to see operational cash flow to cover all its spending and dividend payments. Investors should watch to see that this spending gap can finally be bridged in 2017.  If it can, then Chevron will be well on the path to putting this oil downturn behind it.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


