Oil prices plunged again today. Brent crude, the global oil benchmark, fell more than 8% by noon EDT on Monday, pushing its price down to around $31 a barrel.
That sell-off in the oil market hit energy stocks hard. Most oil producers sold off on the day, with several oil giants declining by more than 10% at one point in the day. Among those experiencing a double-digit decline were Chevron (NYSE:CVX), BP (NYSE:BP), Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.A) (NYSE:RDS.B), Suncor Energy (NYSE:SU), Apache (NASDAQ:APA), and Occidental Petroleum (NYSE:OXY).
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The price of oil continued to weaken due to shocks to both demand and supply. The latest demand jolt came when the European Union proposed suspending nonessential travel to Europe for the next 30 days to combat the COVID-19 pandemic. These travel restrictions, which are popping up all over the world, will have a substantial effect on oil consumption in the coming months. They couldn't have come at a worse time for the oil industry, because OPEC had pledged to flood the market with oil after its support agreement with Russia collapsed earlier this month.
The cratering of oil prices is forcing oil companies to take action so that they can survive this slump. Occidental Petroleum already announced that it would slash its dividend by 86%, while also reducing its capital budget range to between $3.5 billion and $3.7 billion, a 32% cut at the midpoint. These moves would enable the company to support its reset dividend and spending plan on the cash flow it can produce at an oil price in the low $30s.
Apache also did something similar, including slashing its dividend by 90% and cutting capital spending by 37%. As a result of that deep investment cut, Apache plans to suspend its drilling operations in the once red-hot Permian basin.
Several other major oil companies are also contemplating making cuts to their spending plan. Reuters reported last week that Chevron is considering reducing its capital spending as well as its production to combat the rout in oil prices. This report came roughly a week after Chevron reaffirmed its long-term spending plan of $19 billion to $24 billion per year through 2024. However, with crude prices crashing, the company will likely adjust its strategy so that it can better align spending with its anticipated cash flow at lower oil pricing levels.
BP, meanwhile, is mulling a capital spending cut of around 20%, according to comments by CEO Brian Gilvary in an interview with Bloomberg. The CEO said that the company sees "negative" oil demand this year with the possibility that oil prices could go even lower. However, BP believes it can still achieve its asset sales target by the middle of next year and isn't contemplating any changes to its dividend.
Royal Dutch Shell and Suncor haven't publicly commented on their capital spending plans. However, given the shellacking in the oil market, both will likely need to reduce their investment spending levels to better align them with anticipated cash flow at lower oil prices.
The oil market crash is forcing even the largest oil producers to adjust their spending plans. These moves will help better align their operations to current market conditions, helping them stay afloat during this turbulent time. They'll also result in most companies producing less oil than initially expected this year, which will help ease the glut of oil that's starting to flood the market.



Before you consider Royal Dutch Shell plc, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Royal Dutch Shell plc wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


2020 will be a historic year, with the COVID-19 outbreak sparking an extremely fast and sharp stock market drop into bear market territory. Even after the losses that investors have seen, there's still plenty of uncertainty about what the future will hold. Even the blue chip stocks in the Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI) have suffered significant losses, with every single one of the 30 stocks in the average down for the year as of March 13.
Defensively minded investors have often turned to a simple strategy that's easy to follow and has often offered some protection from downturns in the past. But the coronavirus has been highly disruptive to many investing strategies. The Dogs of the Dow have a solid track record, but they don't win every single year, and at least so far, the strategy's ability to outpace the broader average in 2020 is in great doubt. Let's take a closer look to find out why.
Investment
Price Change in 2020 Year to Date
Dow Jones Industrials
(18.8%)
Dogs of the Dow
(25.4%)
SOURCE: YAHOO! FINANCE. AS OF MARCH 13.
In order to follow the Dogs of the Dow strategy, all you have to do is look up which 10 stocks in the Dow Jones Industrials had the highest dividend yields at the beginning of the year. Once you know those 10 stocks, the strategy has you divide your portfolio into 10 equal parts and invest the same amount in all 10 of the Dogs of the Dow.
The basis for the Dogs of the Dow method is the belief that stocks fall out of favor one year are good prospects the next, and that companies paying substantial dividends offer some added protection compared to those with lower dividend yields. That's been true more often than not lately, with the annual return of the Dogs beating out the broader Dow in seven of the past 10 years.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
A few major trends are largely responsible for the Dogs' underperformance so far this year:
In addition, the equal-weight method the Dogs of the Dow strategy uses has hurt its performance. Only three of this year's Dogs have share prices above $100, and that makes their influence on the price-weighted Dow Jones Industrial Average minimal. For instance, ExxonMobil's 45% drop gets a weighting of 10% in the Dogs, but only 1.1% in the broader benchmark.
We're less than three months into 2020, so obviously, there's a lot of time for the Dogs of the Dow to regain some of their losses. To do so, though, it'll take major reversals of several key trends like the declines in energy and materials stocks. A solution to the COVID-19 pandemic could bring such a reversal. Alternatively, it's possible that if the rest of the Dow Jones Industrials see further losses, it could eliminate the advantage that the broader average of blue chip stocks has had so far this year.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


