With interest rates and bond yields at extremely low levels, many investors are chasing the high yields offered by a number of risky dividend-paying stocks. But buying companies simply because of the size of the dividend isn't something more conservative investors should be doing. If a 10% to 15% yield is what you are looking for, you may not have to search as far as you think.
What's your real yield?
When you look at the performance of your portfolio, the return on investment is based off the price you paid for different stocks. So why don't we follow the same logic when looking at dividend yields of stocks? I'd say that when you own a stock and it pays a dividend, you shouldn't care about its current yield; instead, you should focus on the current dividend compared to the price you paid for the stock.
For example, say you had bought the following four companies 10 years ago for your portfolio:
Company
April 2002
Share Price
Recent Share Price
Current Annual Dividend per Share
Yield Based on 2002 Price
Source: Yahoo Finance; author's calculations. 2002 prices adjusted for splits.
Over the years, rising dividends have increased the stocks' dividend yields when you compare them to their original share prices. Now, McDonald's pays 10% of your purchase price annually in dividends, and the others are getting close to double-digit percentage payouts.
Sometimes this works even better with growth companies that don't even pay dividends at the time you buy them. For instance, if you had bought Apple 10 years ago, you would have paid less than $13 per split-adjusted share. With Apple's new dividend of $2.65 per quarter, you'll have your entire initial investment paid back to you in the first five quarters.
Still worth buying?
As you can see, these five companies would all have made wonderful buys 10 years ago, but the real question is, "Are they still worth buying today?" I believe they are. Other than Apple, these companies have all boosted their annual dividend payouts every year for 25 years or more. But more importantly, each of these companies has specifics that make it worth buying.
McDonald's is the clear-cut leader in the fast-food business, with No. 1 market share in nearly all of the countries in which it does business. The Golden Arches saw same-store sales increase 7.3% in the most recent quarter. Its growth continues to impress.
Chevron may be in second place behind Exxon in terms of market cap among U.S. oil companies, but Chevron's dividend yield is significantly higher than Exxon's, even after both of them raised their payouts recently. Chevron also has a cheaper valuation than Exxon based on earnings.
Nucor bears the title of North America's largest recycler, with steel production and scrap-metals brokerage among its businesses. The company's modern and efficient "mini-mills" format helps save the company on costs, helping it stand out from many of its peers.
HCP currently boasts a portfolio of over 1,000 health-care facilities, and with an aging U.S. population, future revenue should remain fairly consistent. The company gets the majority of its revenue from senior housing and skilled-nursing properties, and a big portion of its sales comes from private-pay patients, rather than government reimbursements, helping shelter it from health care reform effects.
Last but not least, while most investors talk about Apple's future growth prospects, I believe you should buy it for the dividend. Based on first-quarter earnings per share, Apple's dividend payout ratio will be around 21%. If Apple continues to grow rapidly, and management wants to keep the payout ratio around 20% to 25%, the dividend will also continue to rapidly increase. If growth slows down to a normal pace, the board still has plenty of room to increase the dividend, as the payout ratio is low (not to mention Apple's $110 billion in cash sitting in the bank.)
Foolish take
Regardless of a company's dividend yield today, long-term buy-and-hold investing in financially solid companies can turn modest payouts into cash cows over time. Start building a portfolio today that will be producing yields of 10% or more in the future by getting this Motley Fool special report on safe, dividend-paying companies. Just click here.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



There's simply no denying how important energy is not only to our economy, but to our very existence. If we need it to live, your portfolio should have it, too. Below I've outlined four stocks to diversify an energy-less portfolio.
A solid bet: Chevron (NYSE: CVX)
According to PFC Energy, Chevron turned in the best performance of 2011 out of the 10 biggest integrated oil and gas companies by market cap. The company posted 17% year-over-year growth in share price, better than ExxonMobil and Royal Dutch Shell, the only other members of big oil who mustered positive growth last year.
In 2012, Chevron has faced legal battles abroad and production declines in the first quarter as a result of asset divestitures. Consequently, its share price has declined a bit, down around 6% year to date.
Fellow Fool Isac Simon says to avoid Chevron for a bit, but I'm going to be more specific: Watch this stock like a hawk. Long term, Chevron is invested in a major liquefied natural gas project in Australia that is scheduled to come on line in 2014 that will allow the company to cash in on high demand in Asian markets.
In the short term, the company's international gas production is climbing, and its refining margins are up both from last quarter and year over year.  A slight production hiccup isn't enough to scare me off the stock. It's all about waiting for a perfect entry point now. And let's be honest, oil prices aren't coming down anytime soon and nothing is kinder to an oil company's bottom line than high prices.
The riskier move: Valero (NYSE: VLO) 
As a subsector of the oil and gas industry, refining tends to be the least popular among investors. If the price of oil falls too low, refiners get absolutely hammered on the bottom line. However, the price of oil has been high for some time now, and if there is any refiner to make investors second-guess leaving refining out of their portfolios, Valero is it.
The company is uniquely positioned to make the most of the current state of domestic oil production. Its refineries are on the Gulf Coast, the perfect location for exports. While East Coast refineries were shutting down last year, Valero grew revenue from $82 billion to $126 billion. Its proximity to cheap American oil and American ports were the reason its share price jumped 35% year over year.  Expect more of the same this year. Energy demand across the globe is increasing, and Valero stands to make a killing on exports.
The toll road: Williams Cos. (NYSE: WMB)
After the KinderMorgan/El Paso merger, Williams Cos. became the fifth largest midstream company by market cap. Its 29% year over year stock growth was second only to Enbridge last year, and the company continued that success through the first quarter of this year.
Earnings were up $0.70 per share compared to $0.54 per share last year. Part of that was because of a 2010 divestiture, but part of it was also due to improved higher fees and higher margins from the general partner interest in its pipeline business, Williams Partners (NYSE: WPZ).
Looking ahead, Williams Cos. expects to complete its acquisition of natural gas processing company Caiman Energy shortly. The company also plans to bring a Canadian pipeline online next month, ahead of schedule.
The hedged bet: Eni (NYSE: E)
Italian oil giant Eni is one of the biggest oil companies in the world. What I like about Eni, however, is its commitment to developing alternative energies, particularly solar power, a hedge against traditional fossil fuels.
The company has a partnership with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to research and develop innovations in solar technology. Eni committed to investing $25 million over the course of five years. To date, the Eni-MIT Solar Frontiers Center has produced some interesting results. This past December, the center announced it had developed thin, flexible solar cells that could be placed on paper and crumpled yet still function.
Foolish takeaway
The energy industry offers a ton of options for investors looking to diversify their portfolios. If your portfolio is already chock-full of energy stocks (brilliant!) consider checking out nine more ideas with the Fool's special free report: "Secure Your Future With 9 Rock-Solid Dividend Stocks."



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



