The shale boom has supplied the United States with extraordinary growth in natural gas production -- in fact, such growth that prices are expected to remain below most companies' breakeven point for the foreseeable future. Natural gas producers have been hit on the chin since the price plummeted to record lows, but there are a number of companies that can greatly benefit from cheap gas. One of these is Chart Industries, a growing manufacturer who makes products for the entire natural gas value chain. Check out the video below for more information on this rising star. 

Chart is another example of an enterprising company with the potential to take the industry by storm and dominate its market both domestically and globally. However, there are plenty of other companies profiting from our increasingly global economy. Check out our free report, "3 American Companies Set to Dominate the World," and gain the inside track into some of the most influential and profitable companies today. Click here to get your free copy before it's gone.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



Shares of Exxon Mobil (NYSE: XOM) hit a 52-week high yesterday. Let's look at how it got here, and whether clear skies are ahead.
How it got here
Shares of Exxon Mobil have been on a roll recently, despite the fact that the company hasn¡¯t hit earnings estimates for two straight quarters. The declining price of natural gas and oil in the second quarter didn¡¯t help, but production was down 5.6% in the quarter, which is a better sign of where operations were heading.
But the decline in production and prices didn¡¯t hurt profit, because the company had a net gain of $7.5 billion after asset sales and tax-related items, which accounted for $5.3 billion of the jump in net income. But one-time items like this don¡¯t last forever, so investors need to keep their eyes on prices and production going forward.
The declining operating trends aren¡¯t Exxon Mobil¡¯s alone. BP (NYSE: BP), ConocoPhillips (NYSE: COP), and Chevron (NYSE: CVX) all saw revenue decline in the second quarter, as prices weighed on their businesses. But their stocks have all recovered nicely in recent weeks as the price of oil and natural gas was rising.

XOM data by YCharts
As you can see, Exxon Mobil has been treading water for the last five years and is only middle-of-the-pack versus competitors. From an operational perspective, you could say that Exxon Mobil beats out those competitors, because revenue declined less than those four in the most recent quarter, and return on assets is close to the top of comparison companies. This is why the stock can still command a premium when it comes to price/book and P/E ratio.
What's next?
The big question is, will the stock continue to rise over the next year?
I think that  Exxon Mobil, and energy stocks, in general, will have a good year because the economy is slowly improving in the U.S. and, if Europe ever gets its act together, it will act with emerging markets to increase global demand. Prices have fallen due to the weak economy but, once the election is over, and the fiscal cliff mess is figured out, I think the economy will improve, energy prices will rise, and we¡¯ll see a steady improvement from Exxon Mobil.
Let¡¯s also not forget that the company pays a 2.6% dividend yield, which should be music to the ears of investors looking for income. Motley Fool CAPS members have put their weight behind the stock, giving it our top five-star rating. I don¡¯t think a 20% upside is out of the question if oil ends the year above $100 per barrel.
Interested in reading more about Exxon Mobil? Click here to add it to My Watchlist, and My Watchlist will find all of our Foolish analysis on this stock.



Before you consider BP p.l.c., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and BP p.l.c. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



