Earnings season has officially begun, and investors can't seem to bury their heads in the sand quickly enough. Reports from aluminum giant Alcoa (NYSE:AA
) and oil juggernaut Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) disappointed a market that had high hopes going into the fourth quarter.
Alcoa's cautionary statements that a slowdown in China would weaken future results when compounded with its already high levels of aluminum inventory bode poorly for near-term aluminum pricing, as well as manufacturing growth.
Chevron's weakness had nothing to do with China when it warned that it expected substantially lower earnings in its upcoming quarter. The No. 2 oil company behind ExxonMobil blamed lower oil prices and Hurricane Isaac for disrupting production at a Mississippi refinery as the reason for its lowered guidance.
Tack on pre-existing worries in Europe and China, as well as continued weak growth in the U.S., and it's pretty clear why the S&P 500 (SNPINDEX:^GSPC
) sank for a fourth consecutive day, ending down 8.92 points (-0.62%), to 1,432.56. Let's have a quick look at two additional companies putting heavy downside pressure on the S&P 500 today.
Unsurprisingly, oil refiners bit the dust today following Chevron's announcement. Valero Energy (NYSE:VLO
) took the brunt of the selling pressure, ending down an S&P 500 worst 6.2%. Lower oil prices are generally good for refiners like Valero because their margins tend to be higher; however, production interruptions and slowing global growth rates could be a possible negative as these refiners ready to report their results.
Energy-drink maker Monster Beverage (NASDAQ:MNST
) also lost its charge, down 5.5%, following an analyst downgrade from Stifel Nicolaus to "hold" from "buy." The covering analyst cited tough year-over-year comparisons, as well as growing regulatory risks as the reason for the downgrade, although he still expects Monster to grow by the mid-teens through 2015. I foresaw the regulatory risks in energy drinks months ago and have long felt that Monster is valued at an undeserved premium to its peers.
An energy stock for all situations
Find out which energy stock is poised to rebound in a big way before 2014 according to our analysts at Motley Fool Stock Advisor, for free, by clicking here to get your copy of this latest special report.




Before you consider the S&P 500 Index - Price Return (USD), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the S&P 500 Index - Price Return (USD) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



Chevron closed down more than 4% after substantially lowering its third-quarter numbers, expecting the third quarter to be more sour than an unspectacular second quarter. The company was hampered by hurricane Isaac, losing 19,000 barrels per day of production, as well as the Richmond refining accident, which decreased the company's refining capacity by 92,000 barrels per day.
Chevron's upstream operations should be back to full production for the fourth quarter, but its refining bottleneck is expected to continue until next year. The question now is what other E&P players are also expected to fall short of third-quarter estimates, since a number of companies sustained similar shutdowns after this year's hurricane season.




Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



With the Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI
) down again this morning and the threat of a three-day losing streak looming, investors are increasingly worried over whether a long-awaited correction could be coming. Although September was a pleasant surprise, October has historically included a number of notable declines, with the crashes in 1929 and 1987 obviously heading the list. As the early trickle of earnings reports becomes a flood in the next week or two, you'll get a much better picture of whether worries are justified. For now, the Dow is down about 44 points as of 10:45 a.m. EDT.
Earnings season started yesterday, and investors in Alcoa (NYSE:AA
) apparently weren't too happy about it. Although the aluminum company managed to top analyst expectations by posting a profit of $0.03 per share after adjusting for one-time charges, Alcoa's forecast of weaker Chinese demand in heavy-truck and trailer manufacturing and slowing growth in Chinese can and packaging business chilled investors. The stock is off almost 4% this morning.
Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) also fell more than 3% as the oil giant issued a warning in advance of its third-quarter report. The company cited disruptions from Hurricane Isaac and a refinery fire, as well as lower production and realized prices as reasons for its reduced earnings expectations. The news also pulled ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
) down about three-quarters of a percent, as both companies face much the same challenges in the current environment. Yet Chevron expects a rebound in the fourth quarter, potentially making the sell-off a buying opportunity.
Finally, Wal-Mart (NYSE:WMT
) managed to buck the trend, rising nearly 3% as the company builds momentum behind its Wal-Mart To Go same-day delivery service. With the retail leader facing increasing competition from online retailers promising cheap, fast shipping, Wal-Mart's initiative addresses the demand for speed and simplicity. Wal-Mart also likely benefited from strong earnings at rival Costco, which soared more than 4% this morning.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


