Following recent drilling successes, deepwater oil and gas prospects offshore Africa have created a big buzz in the global energy industry. A handful of energy companies have already claimed sizable stakes in such projects.
Offshore Tanzania, for instance, has attracted the interest of Anadarko, which reported promising results from one of its exploratory wells last year, as well as Petrobras (NYSE:PBR
), which is getting to ready to drill wells in two offshore exploratory blocks.
Meanwhile, Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) recently announced that it is gearing up to develop the Moho Bilondo "Phase 1 bis" and Moho Nord projects offshore the Republic of the Congo, while ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
) is getting ready to develop exploratory prospects off the coast of South Africa, where it purchased a 75% stake in blocks from Impact Oil & Gas in December of last year.  
While these projects hold promise, another big wave of investment in West Africa may be in the deep waters off the southern coast of Gabon, a small West African country bordering Equatorial Guinea and the Republic of the Congo.
Dividend investors are always on the lookout for stocks to invest in that will provide them with the income they need to meet their financial needs. Lately, though, fears about whether dividend stocks have gotten overvalued has made many would-be dividend investors leery of adding new names to their portfolios.
But with the Federal Reserve doing its best to convince the markets that it intends to keep short-term interest rates down for a considerable period of time, investors need to accept the fact that unless you're unwilling or unable to accept the risk involved with the stock market, finding dividend stocks to invest in rather than accepting low yields on bonds and bank CDs is the best way to get the income you need. With that in mind, let's take a look at the characteristics that make for the best dividend stocks right now, examining three examples you can invest in today.
What makes a perfect dividend stock?
When you're looking for the ideal dividend stocks to invest in, you need to focus on three main things. First, the stock's current dividend yield will tell you how much income you can expect right now. Second, looking at the stock's history of dividend increases will give you hints as to the possible future growth of that income. And finally, examining how the dividend compares to earnings and free cash flow will reveal whether the current dividend is sustainable, both now and in the long run.
It's hard to find stocks that meet all three of those criteria. Mortgage REITs Annaly Capital (NYSE:NLY
) and American Capital Agency (NASDAQ:AGNC
), for instance, undoubtedly meet the first criterion, with double-digit dividend yields making them look especially attractive. But lately, both companies have had to cut their dividends, and their share prices have fallen in response to those dividend cuts. Moreover, although the companies have taken steps to hedge their exposure to the likelihood of rising interest rates in the coming years, the question remains whether those efforts will be sufficient to allow them to continue to profit from their highly leveraged business model when interest rate conditions are less favorable.
On the other hand, some stocks have very long track records of dividend growth, but their current yields aren't adequate to make them suitable stocks to invest in for most investors. For instance, Franklin Resources has raised its dividend for 32 years in a row, including a 7% increase last December. But the stock yields just 0.8% -- less than half what the overall stock market pays in dividend yield.
3 stocks to consider
For a good mix of positive dividend attributes, the following stocks offer a compelling combination of low payout ratios, long dividend histories, and attractive yields:
Find the best stocks
These three stocks aren't the only ones that dividend investors should look at, but they're representative of the opportunities you can still find in the market. To find the best stocks to invest in, seeking attractive dividend traits is a strategy that should serve you well now and well into the future.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


The new energy boom in the U.S. has captured the attention of the entire world, with massive new discoveries and production increases having had a sizable impact both on long-term prospects for oil stocks as well as on the entire supply and demand relationship for oil and gas across the globe. Yet for investors, oil stocks haven't performed nearly as well as that boom might suggest.
Looking back over the past year, a simple S&P 500 index fund has outperformed many key oil stocks, both domestic and foreign. In particular, ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
) has delivered less than half the gains of the S&P, while British giant BP (NYSE:BP
) has been stuck right at the halfway point. Most of the biggest oil stocks in the U.S. and abroad have delivered only single-digit-percentage gains so far this year, compared to the S&P's double-digit rise. Let's take a look at what's behind the underperformance in oil stocks and whether the industry is poised to recover in the near future.
It's not easy being big
When most people think about the energy boom, they tend to focus on the small exploration and production companies that have gone from being unknown players in the industry to well-known names focusing on key geographical areas with huge production potential. For instance, the Bakken play in North Dakota has turned the state into the highest-growth area in the nation, and Kodiak Oil & Gas (NYSE: KOG) and several other tiny exploration and production companies have ridden the wave of success in boosting their production levels and reaping the Bakken's benefits. Kodiak in particular has leveraged its future success to the Bakken, with plans to spend all of its capital budget in the region.
For the largest oil companies, however, the story is much different. For them, even new discoveries that have opened up opportunities for oil fields that were thought to be entirely played out are relatively insignificant compared to the massive amounts of oil and gas that they currently produce. As a result, big oil stocks have to rely on innovation and asset purchases just to stay even with natural declines in existing-well output. During the first quarter, Exxon reported a 3.5% drop in production compared to the year-ago period, while France's Total (NYSE:TOT
) saw 2% production declines.
Moreover, the success of oil companies in replacing reserves has been mixed. Exxon and Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) have both seen reserves rise more than enough to offset their production, but Total and Royal Dutch Shell have fallen short, with reserve replacement ratios in the 85%-95% range. Competition among major oil companies to replace depleted fields with new opportunities has driven up asset prices, narrowing margins and making oil stocks look less attractive.
The coming margin crunch
In particular, the quest for more production has pushed energy companies outside their traditional comfort zone, with exploration now centering on high-cost, high-reward unconventional areas like offshore ultra-deepwater fields, Canada's oil sands, and the lucrative shale plays that have popped up around the world. All of these methods allow oil companies to claim gains on their reserves, but actually producing oil and gas from them involves much greater amounts of investment and requires energy prices to remain higher in order to be profitable.
Again, small companies have an easier job in building up assets, as they can move the needle with pure plays on lucrative areas. The long-term challenge that big oil companies face in achieving the same success poses a greater risk, and that's a big part of why oil stocks have suffered lately.
Will oil stocks become leaders again?
With production being such a limiting factor for oil companies, you can expect energy prices to be the primary factor in determining profits. A sustained move for oil above $100 and a continuing recovery in natural gas prices could push oil stocks higher, but with higher supplies of energy products and continuing new discoveries, such a move looks unlikely in the short run.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


