The Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI
) is up to its old tricks again. As of 12:40 p.m. EST, the market's premier value index is down about 66 points, or 0.52%. The Dow has lost a nerve-wracking 557 points since the markets closed on Election Day.
What's up with today's continued drop? At a glance, you might want to blame Bank of America (NYSE:BAC
), as the bank leads the Dow downward with a 1.8% dive. Rival (and former Dow component) Citigroup (NYSE:C
) is under shareholder pressure to break itself up into a bundle of smaller operations, which is a terrifying idea to megabanks with a deeply rooted addiction to economies of scale.
But that's actually just a tiny piece of today's Dow puzzle. Bank of America only took a single point off the index's total value. With a single-digit share price, the stock simply doesn't move the price-weighted index's needle very far.
Boeing (NYSE:BA
) and Home Depot (NYSE:HD
) hit a bit closer to the mark. The aerospace and defense giant lost 1.8%, or 10 Dow points, in a double-whammy of looming pension-plan changes and newfound cost-awareness in the Department of Defense. Home Depot is simply giving back some of yesterday's huge gains in a typical display of investors getting carried away. The damage? A 2% drop and 10 more Dow points lost. Yep, Boeing and Home Depot play in the same share price league, casting a shadow over Dow values several times larger than Bank of America's.
That's also why Chevron (NYSE:CVX
), with shares sitting north of $100 per stub, inflicted the day's largest Dow drop. A mere 1.7% drop slashed 16 points off the Dow. Construction delays and a rising Australian dollar are inflating the costs of Chevron's natural-gas project Down Under, which was priced at a massive $37 billion to begin with.



Before you consider Bank of America Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Bank of America Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


