The global economy is moving away from fossil fuels and toward renewable energy. However, the transition won't happen overnight. Because of that, even though all the talk these days seems to focus on renewables, we still need companies that produce, process, transport, and store fossil fuels. 
We asked some of our energy contributors what companies will likely continue playing a vital role in the energy market even as we slowly shift toward cleaner power sources. Three that they think stand out are energy infrastructure giants Enterprise Products Partners (NYSE:EPD) and Kinder Morgan (NYSE:KMI) and oil behemoth Chevron (NYSE:CVX). 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Matt DiLallo (Kinder Morgan): Wind farms and solar panels are all the rage these days. That's because these emissions-free power generating assets hold the promise of a cleaner future. However, they're not without issues. The biggest drawback to those renewable energy assets is that they produce intermittent power because the sun doesn't shine all the time and the wind isn't always blowing. While energy storage holds the promise of generating near-firm renewable energy, it adds to the cost.
A cheaper way to produce steady cleaner power is natural gas. Because of that, many see it as a vital bridge fuel to help reduce greenhouse gas emissions until emissions-free alternatives like green hydrogen are commercially viable on a large scale. Given that, the world needs companies that produce gas as well as those that process, transport, store, and export this essential fuel.
Kinder Morgan is one of the leaders in operating the infrastructure needed to support the natural gas market. The company currently operates the largest natural gas network in North America, with more than 70,000 miles of pipelines. Those pipelines act as the toll roads needed to move gas across the country. Kinder Morgan gets paid a fee as that happens, enabling it to generate lots of cash flow.
The company currently pays out half its cash flow via a dividend that yields an eye-popping 6.8%. Meanwhile, it allocates the rest toward expansion projects, debt repayment, and share buybacks. While most of Kinder Morgan's near-term growth is in expanding its fossil fuel infrastructure, the company is slowly transitioning to the future of energy. That makes it a more compelling long-term investment, especially for those focused on generating passive income.
Reuben Gregg Brewer (Chevron): Although renewable power will likely be the growth engine in the energy sector for decades to come, that doesn't mean that carbon-based fuels are going away. In fact, some, like oil and natural gas, will remain vital to the world for decades because they are so deeply entrenched in the global economy. However, given the shift to clean energy, investors should probably err on the side of caution and stick with the biggest and best names in the space, like integrated energy giant Chevron.
The company remains committed to oil and natural gas, unlike some of its peers, which are starting to hedge their bets. That makes Chevron a better pure play in the carbon fuel space. Meanwhile, it has exposure from the upstream (exploration and production) to the downstream (chemicals and refining), providing diversification to its business. Its dividend, which the company has repeatedly explained is a top priority, provides a generous 5.6% yield. And, perhaps most reassuring, its debt-to-equity ratio of 0.26 times is the lowest of its peers.

CVX DEBT TO EQUITY RATIO DATA BY YCHARTS
Chevron will have to work hard to stay an industry leader in the energy sector. But when you look at the big picture, it appears well positioned to do that even as the world increasingly relies on alternative options.
Neha Chamaria (Enterprise Products Partners): Clean-energy transitions may have started to affect the oil industry, but demand for carbon fuels isn't going away anytime soon. Then again, volatility in the oil market, like we saw in 2020, can be rattling. But fluctuations in the price of oil don't affect every oil stock the same way. Oil exploration and production companies are typically hit the hardest when oil prices fall as it directly hits operations. ExxonMobil, for example, expects to write down upstream assets worth nearly $20 billion in the fourth quarter.
Comparatively, companies that process, transport, and store hydrocarbons, also known as midstream oil and gas companies, are somewhat insulated from fluctuations in oil prices as they generate the bulk of their income from fee-based contracts. Consider Enterprise Products Partners, which operates nearly 50,000 miles of NGL, natural gas, and crude oil pipelines.
Evidence of how resilient this company's business is lies in its dividend profile: Enterprise has increased its dividend every year for more than two decades now. Credit goes to a diverse midstream portfolio that can generate steady cash flows. So for example, Enterprise generated $4.8 billion in distributable cash flow during the nine months through Sept. 30, 2020, that comfortably covered its dividend by 1.6 times. The company now expects to scale back capital spending and shift focus to building a stronger balance sheet while supporting dividends and share repurchases. That sounds like a plan, which when combined with Enterprise's 8.7% dividend yield, makes for an enticing bet.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Certain sectors of the economy have held on, or even thrived, during the coronavirus pandemic. Energy is not one of them.
The latest piece of evidence for this is Chevron's (NYSE:CVX) fourth quarter of 2020 earnings, which were released on Friday. In the quarter, the oil and gas giant suffered a decline of almost 31% in total revenue and other income, to $25.25 billion. On a non-GAAP (adjusted) basis, the company posted a net loss of $11 million ($0.01 per share), against the nearly $2.8 billion profit of Q4 2019.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Analysts tracking the stock had expected a profit; collectively, they were forecasting adjusted per-share net income of $0.09. They also believed the company would earn more on the top line, as their average revenue estimate was $27.6 billion.
Like other oil and gas companies, Chevron has found it difficult to adjust to the considerable economic challenges posed by the coronavirus pandemic. The outbreak has weakened demand for the industry's products, and Chevron and its peers are in batten-down-the-hatches mode. They are slashing expenditures in an effort to ride out the current conditions until the pandemic subsides and demand starts to at least approach previous levels.
"When market conditions deteriorated, we swiftly reduced capital spending by 35% from 2019 and also reduced operating costs, demonstrating our commitment to capital and cost discipline," CEO Mike Wirth said. All told, outside of severance costs, operating expenses were cut by around $1.4 billion from the previous year's level.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


