Will this magical run for the United States' oldest market index, the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI
) ever end? If investors have their say, probably not anytime soon.
The Dow has absolutely been on fire since the recession, with the index up 139% from its closing lows set in March 2009. The nation's unemployment rate is trekking along at a six-year low of 7.2%, the nation's manufacturing sector is expanding at its fastest rate in years, and the housing sector continues to show strength with home prices up practically 13% from the previous year according to the Case-Shiller 20-City Index.
As you might imagine, not everyone agrees that the Dow can possibly head any higher from its current levels given Congress' inability to handle macroeconomic issues like the debt-ceiling over the past two years. Just yesterday we took a closer look at five Dow components that short-sellers have been piling into over the past month with the expectation that the Dow could be ready to decline.
But there's another side to this coin. There's a group of Dow components collectively known as its "five most loved stocks" that short-sellers wouldn't dare bet against. That's why today, as we do every month, I'm going to suggest we take a deeper dive into these five loved Dow stocks. Why, you wonder? Because these companies offer insight as to what to look for in a steady business so we can apply that knowledge to future stock research and hopefully locate similar businesses.
Here are the Dow's five most loved stocks:
Company
Short Interest as a % of Outstanding Shares
General Electric (NYSE:GE
)
0.63%
Wal-Mart (NYSE:WMT
)
0.68%
Procter & Gamble (NYSE:PG
)
0.74%
Chevron (NYSE:CVX
)
0.75%
United Technologies 
0.76%
SOURCE: S&P CAPITAL IQ.
General Electric
Why are short-sellers avoiding General Electric?
Do investors have a reason to worry?
Wal-Mart
Why are short-sellers avoiding Wal-Mart?
Do investors have a reason to worry?
Procter & Gamble
Why are short-sellers avoiding Procter & Gamble?
Do investors have a reason to worry?
Chevron
Why are short-sellers avoiding Chevron?
Do investors have a reason to worry?
United Technologies
Why are short-sellers avoiding United Technologies?
Do investors have a reason to worry?




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


