Dividend investors would be wise to focus not just on a stock's current yield, but also on the long-term growth potential of its dividends. That's because strong businesses that consistently raise their dividend payouts reward shareholders with a steadily rising income stream that essentially equates to a raise every year. And, well, who doesn't like a raise?
But there are other reasons to value dividend growth so highly, and they're well supported by research. For instance, a study by C. Thomas Howard published in Advisor Perspectives found that for every percentage point a stock's yield rises, its annual return increases by 0.22 percentage points if it's a large cap, 0.25 if it's a mid cap, and 0.46 if it's a small cap. Even better, Howard found that dividend-growing stocks outperformed dividend cutters by 10 percentage points per year from 1973 to 2010 and beat both flat- and no-dividend stocks. And the icing on the cake is that Howard showed that this outperformance came with a third less volatility. Higher returns, less volatility-induced stress, and a steadily growing income stream -- what's not to love?
With that in mind, here are five stocks that have grown their dividends by more than 10% over the past year:
Company
1-Year Dividend Growth Rate
Kinder Morgan (NYSE:KMI
)
18%
Accenture (NYSE:ACN
)
17.2%
Goldcorp (NYSE:GG
)
14%
Chevron (NYSE:CVX
)
12.1%
United Technologies (NYSE:RTX
)
11.5%
SOURCE: S&P CAPITAL IQ
Kinder Morgan is the largest midstream energy company in North America, with approximately 80,000 miles of pipelines that transport natural gas, refined petroleum products, crude oil, carbon dioxide, and other products. Most of Kinder Morgan's businesses are able to avoid commodity price risk by operating like a giant toll roads that receive a fee for their transportation services. That consistent cash flow is then passed on to shareholders in the form of a 4.5% dividend, helping Kinder Morgan earn a top tier five-star rating in CAPS.
Accenture is a top tier management consulting, technology services, and outsourcing organization. Its areas of specialization include finance, enterprise performance, systems integration, risk management, sales, and talent management, as well as industry-specific consulting services. Accenture currently sports a four-star rating in CAPS and is yielding 2.5%.
Goldcorp is engaged in the acquisition, exploration, development, and operation of precious metal properties, including gold, silver, copper, lead, and zinc . Goldcorp currently has a three-star ranking on CAPS and offers investors a 2.3% yield.
As a major integrated energy company, Chevron is involved in many aspects of the energy production spectrum, from the exploration and production of oil and natural gas, to the refining of crude oil and the manufacture of petrochemicals, to coal mining operations and alternative fuel sources. This energy titan currently sports a four-star rating in CAPS and is yielding 3.3%.
United Technologies provides technology products and services to the building systems and aerospace industries worldwide. This diversified conglomerate owns Carrier heating and air conditioning, Otis elevators, Pratt & Whitney aircraft engines, Sikorsky helicopters, and more. Fools have given United Technologies a four-star rating in CAPS and its stock is yielding 2%.
The Foolish bottom line
Had you invested in these companies a year ago, you would have enjoyed total dividend increases ranging from 11% to 18%. That level of growth would provide a substantial boost to just about any investor's dividend income. But more important to investors today is to identify the companies that will grow their dividends substantially in the years ahead. If you're interested in hearing about some excellent companies that are likely to boost their dividends from this point forward, I'd like to offer you a brand-new free report from The Motley Fool's expert analysts called "Secure Your Future With 9 Rock-Solid Dividend Stocks." Today I invite you to download it at no cost to you. To discover the identities of these companies before the rest of the market catches on, you can access this valuable free report by simply clicking here now.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



The deepwater Gulf of Mexico holds an incredible amount of oil and gas. It's truly a world-class energy basin as so far the industry has discovered 77 billion barrels of oil equivalent. The challenge is getting that oil and gas out of the ground, which requires drilling some of the most difficult wells in the world. One company leading the way to meet those challenges head-on is Chevron (NYSE:CVX
).
The company has a vast portfolio of projects either already in production or heading in that direction. The following map shows just how deep a position the company has in the region.

SOURCE: CHEVRON INVESTOR PRESENTATION (LINK OPENS A PDF)
Notice that Chevon has a nice blend of projects already in production and those it's investing in to drive later production, as well as appraisal and exploration wells to fuel its future.
Looking ahead, 2014 will be a big year for the oil giant in the Gulf. The company has five major capital projects in the works, most of which are scheduled to begin production next year. The following slide details the production boost some of these projects are expected to deliver. Take note of the specific production capacities these projects are expected to offer.

SOURCE: CHEVRON INVESTOR PRESENTATION
These are truly massive projects. Chevron owns half of the Jack/St. Malo project, with partners including Statoil (NYSE:EQNR
) owning the other half of the project. The project will cost $7.5 billion and will eventually include the connection of 43 subsea wells. For some perspective on the impact of this project consider that in 2012 Chevron only produced 125,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day in the deepwater of the Gulf of Mexico. This project alone will add 88,500 barrels of oil equivalent production per day net to Chevron. That's a 71% boost to last year's production and it's just one of the projects the company is bringing online in 2014. 

It's followed by the $4.1 billion Big Foot project, of which Chevron owns 60% in partnership with companies including Statoil. One of the more interesting facts on this project is that the hull for the offshore platform was actually manufactured in South Korea and required a three-month journey by sea before arriving in the U.S. Again, given Chevron's share of the production, this is a needle-moving project for the company. 

Finally, Tubular Bells, which is operated by Hess (NYSE:HES
) will be connected into a floating production system owned by Williams Partners (NYSE: WPZ) this year. It's the least expensive of these projects, costing a mere $2.3 billion; Chevron has an ownership share of 42.9%. The key to this project was using Williams. The company's proprietary floating production system is quicker to build so it reduces the cycle time between discovery and actually producing oil.
Chevron has a lot of oil coming online next year from that Gulf. That means that investors will finally begin to see returns from all the capital the company spent. Add it all up and 2014 has the potential to be a very good year for Chevron's investors.
High Oil Prices are the Key to Chevron's Returns


Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


