The big news on Wall Street today is that the Department of Commerce's final reading of first-quarter GDP was released, and it was revised downward from 2.4% to 1.8%, the markets are moving higher. As of 12:45 p.m. EDT the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI
) is up 107 points, or 0.73%, while the S&P 500 and the Nasdaq have risen by 0.75% and 0.76%, respectively. Every component of the GDP report was lowered from the previous estimate except housing and government spending, which is not a good sign.
But I believe the markets may be celebrating this because investors see the lower-than-expected GDP number as a reason for the Federal Reserve to continue stimulating the economy for longer than they had previously expected. Ben Bernanke made it clear last week that he would begin slowing the central bank's bond-buying program if the economy kept moving down its current path. However, today's report clearly shows that the U.S. economy is not as strong as we had previously been told, so the free-money policies may last longer than even the Fed's chairman told us it would.
While the broader market is partying, let's look at a few stocks on America's premier blue-chip index whose invitations got lost in the mail.
A few Dow losers
Shares of Alcoa (NYSE:AA
) rank at the bottom of the Dow today, down 1.8%. Fool contributor Caroline Bennett recently pointed out three reasons to stay away from the aluminum giant despite its market-leading status. With that said, China's government has recently cracked down on easy money and credit, which have caused bubbles in the country. Reports also indicate that the new government will address the oversupply of steel and other metals in the country by shutting down some of the mills that have sprouted up like weeds all over the nation. If the Chinese government slows its own country's production rates, that should help Alcoa as the price of aluminum stabilizes.  
Other commodity-driven Dow stocks are also declining today. Shares of Caterpillar have fallen 0.3% as the prices of gold, silver, copper, and platinum drop. The company needs metals prices to perform well so that emerging markets, which are big commodity-producers, will continue to buy earth-moving equipment and machinery.
Both Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) and ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
) are down slightly today, having lost 0.1% and 0.3%, respectively. As with Alcoa, the price of the oil supermajors' main commodity is slipping today. Light crude is down slightly, while unleaded gas has fallen 1%. Heating oil has even declined by nearly 1%, while the only major fuel source that has risen today is natural gas, up 0.66%. The lower-than-expected U.S. GDP number and the fear that China is slowing down are likely weighing on both the price of oil and the Dow's two major oil companies. 




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Last winter, Mexico elected a new president who just so happens to be committed to energy reform. The country's oil production has dropped precipitously over the last five years, and many analysts predict that Mexico could wind up a net importer if something doesn't change fast.
Opening the country up to foreign companies like ExxonMobil and Chevron would get the production game going again, but in this video, Fool.com contributor Aimee Duffy talks about some other companies that would be affected by growing production south of the border.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


