Stocks were generally mixed on Tuesday, with major market benchmarks remaining near all-time highs. The S&P 500 (SNPINDEX:^GSPC) and Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI) eased off their records from Monday, while the Nasdaq Composite (NASDAQINDEX:^IXIC) also lost a bit of ground and is further away from its high-water mark.
Index
Percentage Change
Point Change
Dow
(0.29%)
(97)
S&P 500
(0.10%)
(4)
Nasdaq Composite
(0.05%)
(7)
DATA SOURCE: YAHOO! FINANCE.
Many investors would prefer a simple way to invest that doesn't require them to look obsessively at the stock market every day. One alternative that many investors have turned to over the years involves picking the stocks known as the Dogs of the Dow.
Despite some tough years recently, the Dogs of the Dow strategy is easy to use and has been outperforming the market so far in 2021. Let's take a closer look to find out why.
Investment
Price Change in 2021 Year to Date
Dow Jones Industrials
9.2%
Dogs of the Dow
11.3%
SOURCE: DOGSOFTHEDOW.COM, AS OF APRIL 6, 2021.
If you're looking for an easy investing strategy, it's hard to get simpler than the Dogs of the Dow. The 10-stock portfolio is composed of the top-yielding dividend stocks in the Dow Jones Industrial Average as of the beginning of each year, and you'd purchase them with equal dollar amounts. You then hold the stocks for a full year.
To use the strategy the following year, just look at the updated dividend yields and make substitutions as necessary. Often, there's considerable overlap, making year-to-year adjustments easy to make.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Usually, the Dogs of the Dow method does well when value investing is in vogue, because Dogs of the Dow stocks tend to have high yields since their share prices have fallen relative to other Dow components. If those businesses rebound, then they can provide outperformance over the broader market. That's been true in six out of the past 10 years.
The Dogs are getting some help from market trends this year. They include:
Of course, 2021 is just over three months old, so it's too early for the Dogs to declare victory just yet. However, if you're looking for blue chip stocks that can stand the test of time, the 10 stocks that make up the 2021 Dogs of the Dow all have business strengths that makes them solid investment choices for dividend-hungry investors.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


