Beginning in the 1960s and culminating in the mid-80s, the apartheid divestment movement involved investors selling their shares of companies that were benefiting economically from South Africa's apartheid regime. The movement was broad enough that it's credited with adding to the pressure on the apartheid government to begin negotiations that ultimately led to its demise. It's considered a successful case of investor activism to correct a social harm.
Flash-forward to today, and there's a growing movement to divest from hydrocarbons in order to deal with climate change. Part of this movement is 350.org, an organization that urges college and university endowments to divest their shares of fossil fuel companies. The group takes particular aim at Transcanada (NYSE:TRP
) because of the heavy carbon impact of the Keystone XL pipeline, as well as those companies most exposed to the "carbon bubble," including BP (NYSE:BP
), Shell (NYSE:RDS.A
), and Chevron (NYSE:CVX
).
John Vechey of PopCap Games recently joined The Motley Fool for a climate change summit. His first panel guests were Dr. Rachel Cleetus, a climate economist with the Union of Concerned Scientists, and Dr. Joe Casola, program director for science and impacts at the Center for Climate and Energy Solutions. In the video below, they offer divergent views on divestment and whether it is a constructive approach to take.



Before you consider Royal Dutch Shell plc, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Royal Dutch Shell plc wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


In less than one month, the Canadian National Energy Board has received three brand-new requests for liquefied natural gas, or LNG, export terminals. Add these facilities to the two that have already been granted approval, and Canada would have export capacity greater than all the natural gas it produces in one year. Obviously, this means that some of these facilities will never get off the ground, and the same can be said for those in the U.S. as well.
With 14 export licenses waiting approval from the U.S. Department of Energy, these facilities' capacity would far outpace the global demand for LNG, so it is almost certain that not all of them will get built. A few have a much better chance than others, but to be competitive in the LNG space, it could come down to who can get built and contracted the fastest. Tune into the video below where Fool.com contributor Tyler Crowe looks at a few companies jumping ahead of the game.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



