Shares of integrated energy majors ExxonMobil Corporation (NYSE:XOM) and Chevron Corporation (NYSE:CVX) were up by mid single digits at lunchtime on April 29. Smaller player Vermilion Energy (NYSE:VET), meanwhile, saw its stock rocket over 12% at the open, before settling down to a high single-digit gain by the middle of the day. Mr. Market was excited about oil today!
There's a glut of oil in the world today. There are a number of reasons for this, including the emergence of U.S. onshore drilling as a major global player over that last decade or so, OPEC and Russia getting into a temporary oil price war (which has now been concluded), and the global economic shutdowns related to the world's effort to slow the spread of COVID-19. Each one of these items could be written about extensively, but the big picture here is that supply is elevated at a time when demand has fallen dramatically and quickly.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
There is so much oil, in fact, that companies are having trouble storing it all. The world's ability to store oil is limited and at this point the storage tanks are nearly full. They've even begun enlisting Suezmax ships, which usually ferry oil around the world, to act as floating oil tanks. Tanker rates have exploded higher. While that's a boon for companies like Nordic American Tankers, it shows just how bad the oversupply situation really is. So it's little wonder that oil prices have been moribund and oil company shares have been punished. 
However, Mr. Market is fickle and his mood can change on a dime. Today, prices for some types of oil have risen by as much as 30%. Normally that would be a massive move, but it's actually not so out of line with the recent ups and downs in the energy sector. There were two pieces of good news driving the upbeat view. First, economies are starting to reopen after essentially shutting down to deal with the spread of COVID-19. That means that demand, which had fallen off a cliff, is likely to start coming back again.    
The other bit of good news was an industry update from the American Petroleum Institute showing that U.S. oil inventories hadn't built up quite as much as expected. That suggests that there may not be as much extra oil floating around as some people think. And, in turn, working down the extra inventory might not take as long as some industry watchers had feared. Before getting too excited here, however, the expected inventory increase was 10.6 million barrels and the actual number came in at 10 million barrels. The direction was right, but the actual numbers weren't huge.   
Still, with those bits of upbeat news as a backdrop, investors bid the shares of oil giants Exxon and Chevron higher. These stocks don't tend to make huge percentage moves; they have diversified businesses that span the energy spectrum from upstream (drilling) to downstream (refining and chemicals), so the mid-single digit advances here are pretty notable. However, the stock prices of smaller players like Vermilion can get pretty volatile. Thus, the mood shift lifted the shares of this heavily leveraged oil company into the double digits before cooler heads prevailed and the gain came down into "just" the high single digits.     
The ultimate truth here is that this is just another day for a volatile commodity working through a major supply/demand imbalance. Yes, big oil price swings will impact the prices of oil companies like Exxon, Chevron, and Vermilion. But there's still a lot of work to be done around the world before energy demand gets back to its pre-COVID-19 levels. And even after that happens, all of the oil that's in storage still needs to be worked off before this vital energy source can mount a sustained upturn. The news was good today, but investors need to be prepared for bad news tomorrow. Energy stocks are likely to remain volatile for months to come as the world adjusts to the dramatic changes that have taken shape in the oil market.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Editor's note: This piece contains multiple corrections from the originally published version. The Fool regrets the errors.
With Chevron (NYSE:CVX) set to host its annual meeting on May 27, shareholders are pushing for the company to report on how the company's chemical segment is contributing to the human toll of climate change. Investors who prioritize social responsibility may not like Chevron's response. 
This year, thanks to the COVID-19 pandemic, Chevron's annual meeting will be held by phone. The company will be talking about its financial position and growth strategies and calling for shareholder votes on various management issues and proposals from those same shareholders. 
One proposal asks the company to report on how expanding the operations of its chemical division, CPChem, may affect public health in areas prone to climate-change-related natural disasters.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The organization that brought the proposal to the board, As You Sow, is a nonprofit group that uses shareholder advocacy to push for socially responsible business practices in several industries. 
Since 2008, Chevron has been given proposals to vote on regarding the effects of its operations on climate change. Every year, the board of directors at the company has urged shareholders to vote against proposals where environmental sustainability was the central cause. 
Prior to the annual meeting, the company produces a document that outlines the issues to be discussed and offers recommendations from the board on how it wants shareholders to vote for directors and proposals.
This year, the board urges shareholders to vote against As You Sow's initiative. The company cites the segment's "Operational Excellence" system as being adequate enough in portraying risks associated with its operations that stem from safety, health, and environmental issues. 
But the operational excellence statements do not contain the specific information the proposal is asking for, including assessments of the potential effects on public health that expanding its petrochemical segment may cause.  
Sometimes a company causes the public to bear costs to its operations beyond what the company pays -- referred to by economists as "externalities." They can be relatively minor, such as additional time in traffic because a plant was built between a neighborhood and people's workplaces, or major, such as health risks to an entire metropolitan region because a company didn't factor wind into the design and placement of its smokestacks. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Chevron's response may suggest that it has little interest in mitigating the externalities it causes, but it's only fair for the company to assess and disclose to shareholders any externalities the company may cause in expanding its operations in any region. Some might say it's the company's responsibility to do so. Investors who prioritize sustainability and corporate social responsibility are likely to find a better steward than Chevron. 



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


