Although the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI
) isn't plucking off new high after new high like the broader-based S&P 500, it's seen a better than 1,000-point rebound in a little over a month as U.S. economic data has walked a fine line between healthy growth and remaining in need of the Federal Reserve's slowly waning economic stimulus known as QE3.
On one hand, U.S. GDP growth in third quarter was an incredible 4.1%, the unemployment rate has dipped to 6.7% from a peak of 10%, and low lending rates have allowed homeowners and business to refinance debt or expand for historically inexpensive rates. On the other hand this has also been coupled with weakening loan originations and subdued fourth-quarter GDP growth (2.4% as of the second estimate), which could encourage the Fed to reduce the tapering of QE3.
SOURCE: RAPHAELSTRADA, FLICKR.
This good, but not great, growth mentality has stirred up quite a number of short-sellers to take positions betting against a market that they believe has come too far, too fast. Considering that the Fed has artificially kept lending rates low, and it takes twice as long, on average, to find a job now when you're unemployed as it did six years ago, there's certainly some merit to this skepticism. 
Despite this group of dissenters, there exists a select group of "most loved" Dow components that short-sellers wouldn't dare bet against. That's why today, as we do every month, I suggest we take a deeper dive into these five loved Dow stocks. Why, you wonder? Because these companies offer insight as to what to look for in a steady business so we can apply that knowledge to future stock research and hopefully locate similar businesses.
Here are the Dow's five most loved stocks:
Company
Short Interest as a % of Outstanding Shares
United Technologies (NYSE:RTX
)
0.64%
Chevron (NYSE:CVX
)
0.73%
Nike (NYSE:NKE
)
0.73%
Wal-Mart
0.76%
American Express (NYSE:AXP
)
0.79%
SOURCE: S&P CAPITAL IQ.
United Technologies
Why are short-sellers avoiding United Technologies?
Do investors have a reason to worry?
Chevron
Why are short-sellers avoiding Chevron?
Do investors have a reason to worry?
Nike
Why are short-sellers avoiding Nike?
Do investors have a reason to worry?
Wal-Mart
Why are short-sellers avoiding Wal-Mart?
Do investors have a reason to worry?
SOURCE: IMAGES MONEY, FLICKR.
American Express
Why are short-sellers avoiding American Express?
Do investors have a reason to worry?




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


