Chevron (NYSE:CVX) recently agreed to acquire Noble Energy (NASDAQ:NBL) for $13 billion, which includes the assumption of debt. While the main draw was Noble's oil and gas assets -- especially its positions in the Permian Basin and offshore Israel -- Chevron would pick up several other intriguing assets, including Noble's stake in master limited partnership Noble Midstream Partners (NASDAQ:NBLX).
That makes the deal a noteworthy one for Noble Midstream, since it will soon have a much more financially secure parent running the show. That could put the company's 9%-yielding dividend on a much more sustainable foundation.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Noble Energy currently owns a 63% stake in Noble Midstream following a strategic transaction late last year to eliminate management fees and acquire its remaining midstream assets. In addition to holding a sizable stake in the company, Noble Energy is also one of Noble Midstream's top customers. The company currently supplies 81% of its earnings, with the bulk of that coming from its gathering and processing business. 
That close relationship has some strategic benefits. The biggest is that Noble Midstream had the right to build the infrastructure needed to support its parent's growth. Thus, as Noble Energy increased its volumes, Noble Midstream's cash flows would follow suit.
However, there was one key downside: Noble Midstream's business would suffer if Noble had to hit the brakes. That's what happened this year as Noble cut its capital budget when oil prices declined to preserve cash, forcing its MLP to make similar moves, including reducing its distribution. 
Noble Energy took decisive action when oil prices cratered earlier this year to protect its balance sheet, including cutting its capital budget by 50%. Because of that deep spending cut, the company deferred much of its well completion activities in the DJ and Delaware Basins, where Noble Midstream operates, impacting the volumes flowing through its gathering and processing assets. 
Chevron also responded to this year's oil market downturn by slashing spending. Overall, it reduced its capital budget by about 20%, with the largest cut coming at its Permian Basin operations. It expects its production in that region to be about 20% below its initial guidance. As a result, its midstream providers will gather and process fewer volumes, which will impact their cash flow. 
Because both companies cut deeply into their U.S. drilling budgets, this year likely would have been tough for Noble Midstream even if Chevron were in control. Though Chevron's financial strength does give it much more flexibility to quickly boost spending when the oil market recovers. Thus, Noble Midstream could benefit from having Chevron in charge in the future.
However, that assumes Chevron wants to pour capital into the DJ Basin, which would be a new area for the company. One of Chevron's primary reasons for buying Noble was to pick up its acreage in the Permian Basin, which is adjacent to its land in the region. It had previously tried to buy Anadarko Petroleum for that very same region. 
That desire to bulk up in the Permian is worth noting because Noble Midstream currently gets most of its earnings (76% in 2020) from the DJ Basin. If Chevron doesn't put as high a priority on that region, it could stunt Noble Midstream's growth. Though, on a positive note, it now has 15 customers on its systems in that region after recently starting to gather for a new customer this year.
Another question that remains is what Chevron might do with its interest in Noble Midstream. It has several options, including:
With such a range of options, there's a lot of uncertainty about the future of this MLP.
Units of Noble Midstream popped on the day Chevron announced a deal to buy its parent in hopes that it will benefit from having a financially stronger sponsor. While that might be the case, there are many unknowns at the moment, including whether Chevron will invest in the DJ Basin or even keep its stake in the MLP. It's too risky for income investors right now, since it's not clear what the future holds for this 9%-yielding MLP.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Finding high yields while the stock market is near all-time highs is hard, but not impossible. You just need to be careful and stick with financially strong companies with the size and scale to survive difficult business environments like the one that COVID-19 has brought about. On that score, these two high-yield stocks in the out-of-favor energy sector look like survivors. Meanwhile, you can collect historically high yields while you wait for the tough times to pass. Here's a primer on Chevron (NYSE:CVX) and Enterprise Products Partners (NYSE:EPD).
Chevron is one of the world's largest integrated energy companies. It has increased its dividend annually for 33 consecutive years and, and today offers a yield of 5.6%, which is near a 30-year high. To be fair, the energy sector is deeply out of favor today, largely because demand has plummeted -- along with oil and natural gas prices as countries around the world effectively shut down to slow the spread of COVID-19. However, despite a massive supply/demand imbalance, oil and natural gas remain vital global energy sources. And the industry is slowly working to reduce supply, both voluntarily and via company failures.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
Chevron, meanwhile, has a rock-solid balance sheet and a globally diversified business. For example, the company's financial debt to equity ratio was roughly 0.25 times at the end of the first quarter. That's lower than those of any of its closest peers. The company's agreement to buy Noble Energy in an all-stock transaction, meanwhile, is a further sign of strength: The oil giant is basically looking to pick up good assets while others are just trying to survive. Noble will expand Chevron's U.S. position and broaden its reach in the Mediterranean. Meanwhile, the rest of the company's business spans from the upstream (drilling) space to the downstream (chemicals and refining) arena. Diversification is good for your portfolio, and it's good for a company's business, too. 
There's no easy solution to the energy sector's problems, which will take time to fix. And buying Noble means taking on that company's debts (roughly $8 billion), which will have a slightly negative impact on its balance sheet. But this conservative industry giant is going to get through this difficult period, and there's a high likelihood that it comes out the other side a stronger company. Meanwhile, you get to collect a fat dividend that management continues to stand behind. 
The next name up is master-limited partnership Enterprise Products Partners, which is currently offering a huge 9.5% yield (near the highest levels in its history). That distribution, meanwhile, is backed by over two decades of annual increases. And just as important, it boasts a massive and diversified midstream portfolio that would be difficult, if not impossible, to replicate. This is vital, because roughly 85% of Enterprise's gross margin is tied to fees, meaning it is getting paid to move products through its system. The price of what's flowing through its pipes, storage, and processing assets isn't the key factor -- volume is. 

CVX DIVIDEND YIELD DATA BY YCHARTS
To be fair, low oil prices and reduced economic activity because of the coronavirus will hit volumes. However, the partnership covered its distribution by 1.6 times in the first quarter, so it appears well-positioned to handle the adversity. That said, investors should expect that revenue will get hit by less demand for Enterprise's services, and growth may slow as customers pull back on their expansion plans (which reduces the need for more midstream infrastructure). However, the huge yield seems like decent compensation for those issues. 
On top of all of this, Enterprise has a long history of operating in a conservative manner. That includes things like a focus on diversification and strong distribution coverage. But also notable is the partnership's modest use of leverage relative to peers. Financial debt to EBITDA was around 3.5 times at the end of the first quarter, which is toward the low end among its peer group. Investors looking for a way to sidestep the volatile nature of energy prices and still find a way to put some money into the energy sector would do well to take a closer look here.
There's no such thing as a perfect investment, and both Chevron and Enterprise Products Partners have warts. But if you can look past the surface imperfections here, you'll find both have a lot to offer dividend investors. They are both worth closer looks today.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


