After selling its stake in Exxonmobil (NYSE:XOM
) almost 30 years ago; Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway (NYSE:BRK.B
) is reunited with the worlds 2nd largest company after Berkshire picked up $3.4 billion worth of shares in Exxon over the past couple of quarters. Not so say that Exxonmobil is a poor decision, but it may not be the best purchase in the big oil space today. Instead, Mr. Buffett should have looked at Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) instead.
There are three reasons that Chevron is a better pick than Exxonmobil today. One of those reasons is that Chevron generates a much better return per barrel of oil equivalent than Exxon and all of the other members of big oil today. The reason for that is because Chevron produciton mix is much more concentrated on oil than on natural gas like Exxon and other big oil players BP (NYSE:BP
) and Total (NYSE:TOT
). Tune into the video below to learn the two other reasons that Chevon is a better buy today than Exxonmobil.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



Although we don't believe in timing the market or panicking over daily movements, we do like to keep an eye on market changes -- just in case they're material to our investing thesis.
Economic news came back into the forefront as the Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI
) climbed by 91 points as of 11 a.m. EST. Investors chose to see a larger-than-expected plunge in jobless claims as positive for the economy, rather than as a possible contributing factor toward the Fed pulling back on its stimulus measures. The broader market posted even stronger gains, and UnitedHealth Group (NYSE:UNH
) and Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) were among the most notable rising stocks even as Caterpillar (NYSE:CAT
) kept pressuring the average downward.
UnitedHealth Group rose nearly 2% as controversy over the Affordable Care Act continues to make the stock's movements volatile. The decision from the Obama administration to allow states to extend noncompliant health-insurance policies for another year has created discord both among state insurance regulators and among health insurance companies. Small health insurers believe UnitedHealth and other big players could gain competitive advantages from measures to streamline sign-ups through health-insurance exchanges, while political tensions led some state insurance commissioners not to attend a meeting with President Barack Obama about the measure. UnitedHealth shareholders appear convinced, though, that even amid the strife, Obamacare's resolution will lead to better times ahead.
Chevron rose 1% as its ongoing trial to have a massive multibillion-dollar Ecuadoran court verdict struck down continued. On Tuesday, the attorney sued by Chevron took the stand, arguing that his actions were justified and denying doing anything wrong in answering the company's charges of civil racketeering. With the trial nearing an end, the decision could have substantial ramifications for the oil giant, with even a recently reduced award still posing a potential $9.5 billion threat to Chevron's balance sheet.
Despite the bullish mood, Caterpillar fell another 0.6%. Yesterday's report of plunging equipment sales in October only emphasized the long turnaround that the heavy-equipment maker faces, especially in formerly high-growth areas like the Asia-Pacific region. For Caterpillar to get back on its feet, it ideally needs to see commodity prices start to rise and industrial activity reemerge in key emerging markets. Only then will it have the strongest cyclical tailwinds behind it to push its growth higher in the years to come.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


