Thanks to a few top stocks, the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI
) managed to once again set a new all-time closing high at 14,865. Today, the index rose 62 points, or 0.42%, after investors received a better-than-expected jobless claims report, despite a few technology stocks plummeting. The Labor Department reported that initial jobless claims for last week fell by 42,000, to 346,000. Economists were only expecting a decline of 23,000 from the 388,000 claims which were reported two weeks ago.  
With the jobless numbers moving in a positive direction, the markets, as a whole, ended the session on a high note. While the Dow was the top index, the S&P 500 managed to rise 0.36%, as the Nasdaq lagged behind, only gaining 0.09%.
The Nasdaq was likely pulled lower by the IDC report, which indicated that PC sales declined 14% during the first quarter of 2013. This report pulled a number of technology stocks lower, but shares of Cisco (NASDAQ:CSCO
) slipped away from the downward pressure, and managed to become one of the index's top stocks. Shares of the networking giant rose 1% during today's trading session after climbing 2.4% yesterday, and 2% on Tuesday. Today's move came on very little news, but Cisco certainly is gaining momentum. The company also recently announced a joint project with Microsoft, in which the two will work together to provide data center customers with more functionality and lower complexity. In addition, the two will work together to improve and grow data center operations.  
Another top stock today was Chevron (NYSE:CVX
), which saw its shares rise 1.09%. One likely catalyst for the rise was the recent Morgan Stanley report that claimed Chevron would outperform its fellow Dow component and competitor ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
) by 55% over the next few years. Morgan Stanley believes Chevron could experience higher production growth and realize better returns in the coming years. The firm also raised Chevron's price target to $135 per share, while reducing Exxon's to $85 per share.  
Not only does Morgan Stanley believe Chevron is cheap, but my Fool Colleague Brian Pacampara also feels that way. To read what Brian has to say about the company, click here.
Shares of Pfizer (NYSE:PFE
) rose 2.41%, making it the true "top stock" of the Dow today. The increase came after Pfizer announced that its palbociclib, an experimental treatment for breast cancer, received the Breakthrough Therapy designation by the FDA. This is a great development for the company, as it will now have the drug expedited through the regulatory process. Currently, the drug is in the later stages of testing, and this news should help it hit the market sooner rather than later.  
More top stocks



Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Based on the aggregated intelligence of 180,000-plus investors participating in Motley Fool CAPS, the Fool's free investing community, oil and gas giant Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) has earned a coveted five-star ranking.
With that in mind, let's take a closer look at Chevron and see what CAPS investors are saying about the stock right now.
Chevron facts
Headquarters (founded)
San Ramon, Calif. (1879)
Market Cap
$232.4 billion
Industry
Integrated oil and gas
Trailing-12-Month Revenue
$222.6 billion
Management
Chairman/CEO John Watson
CFO Patricia Yarrington
Return on Equity (average, past 3 years)
21.1%
Cash/Debt
$21.9 billion / $12.2 billion
Dividend Yield
3.1%
Competitors
BP
ExxonMobil
ConocoPhillips
SOURCES: S&P CAPITAL IQ AND MOTLEY FOOL CAPS.
On CAPS, 96% of the 4,270 members who have rated Chevron believe the stock will outperform the S&P 500 going forward.
Earlier today, one of those bulls, rtc76, succinctly summed up the Chevron bull case for our community:
Even if the Lago Agrio judgment ends up wiping out the full $19 billion of book value, it's still undervalued with a margin of safety if it can maintain a similar cash flow for the next few years. There are enough variables, though, such as difficulty in replacing reserves, the potential for a substantial drop in oil demand due to new supply and less than expected consumption growth in India or China, to warrant a very watchful eye over the next few years.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


 Want to see how well (or not so well) the stocks in this series are performing? Follow the TrackPoisedTo CAPS account.
Growing up, there was always one gas station in town my family avoided at all costs. That station had the highest prices, of course, and was only for the foolish or desperate. It made more sense -- and saved more cents -- to travel an extra mile or so to the cheaper station. But some Americans are simply out of luck when it comes to tracking down cheap gas. Today we'll take a look at the states where it costs the most to fill up, and why relief may be nowhere in sight.
Pain at the pump
These days, if you are fortunate enough to live in a tropical paradise, you are also unfortunate enough to pay the highest average price for gasoline in the country. Hawaii is first on the list of the five states with the most expensive gas:
Rank
State
Regular Gasoline 
1
Hawaii
$4.39
2
California
$4.02
3
Alaska
$4.01
4
District of Columbia
$3.90
5
New York
$3.85
SOURCE: AAA 
Hawaii only has two operating oil refineries. Tesoro (NYSE:ANDV
) plans to close the one it owns, Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) owns the other, and the cost of shipping crude oil out there is the main reason that gas is so expensive. California is ranked second largely because it has the highest taxes on gas in the country. The combined local, state, and federal taxes tack on just shy of $0.69 per gallon, according to the American Petroleum Institute.
What's in a gas price?
Historically, there has always been more to gas prices than the price of oil. Federal, state, and local taxes, as well as the fees slapped on as gasoline changes hands before it hits your tank, all contribute to the price of gasoline.
The first gasoline tax began in 1919, and 10 years later every state in the union had imposed its own fee on gasoline sales. The revenue collected was used to build out roads and highway infrastructure. In 1929, the taxes brought in $431.4 million, allowing close to half of all states to eliminate property taxes as a source of highway funding.
Flash forward to today
Relying on gas tax revenue to maintain our transportation infrastructure is a tricky business. Today, American roads are in desperate need of repair, but because gas is expensive many of us are driving less. Those that still head out on the highway are increasingly using less gasoline because they are driving more fuel-efficient vehicles.
As a result, many states are making plans to increase taxes on gasoline. Last week, The Wall Street Journal reported that 17 states are considering or have already enacted tax hikes to give their transportation budgets a boost. As further evidence that these are desperate times for infrastructure budgets, 18 states haven't enacted a gas tax increase in 20 years or more.
It may well be that high gas prices are here to stay.



Before you consider Tesoro Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Tesoro Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


