After six straight days of losses for the Dow Jones Industrials (INDEX: ^DJI), investors must have decided it was time for a break from the bearishness. Despite no real resolution to concerns in Europe, stocks rebounded, as investors started to reflect back on an earnings season in which about two-thirds of the companies reporting so far have beaten estimates. Weekly jobless claims in the U.S. were down, but growth in Chinese trade activity was far weaker than expected, with imports rising only 0.3% in April. At 10:45 a.m. EDT, the Dow was up about 0.4%.
The big mover on the Dow was Cisco Systems (Nasdaq: CSCO), which fell more than 8% after the networking company barely beat earnings estimates for its fiscal third quarter but gave negative guidance about the coming quarter. A flurry of price-target cuts from Wall Street analysts ensued, and some fear that Cisco's poor outlook could bode ill for the entire industry.
On the up side, General Electric (NYSE: GE) rose more than 1%. As Fool industrials analyst Isaac Pino discussed this morning, GE is looking to bolster its global presence by meeting infrastructure needs around the world in response to rising standards of living in emerging-market economies. At the same time, GE's energy business has become increasingly important, as the company capitalizes on low natural gas prices to support a network of CNG fueling stations and sell natural-gas-fired turbines.
Finally, energy stocks in the Dow are rising, with Chevron (NYSE: CVX) up more than 1% and ExxonMobil (NYSE: XOM) slightly higher. After falling well below the $100-per-barrel mark over the past week, oil prices climbed by about $0.50 today. But longer term, with new production springing up around the world and troublesome signs of a possible economic slowdown, further price declines aren't out of the question -- and they could put renewed pressure on both Exxon and Chevron.
Looking up
Finding bargain stocks after stock market declines can be very lucrative. Find some ideas in The Motley Fool's special report on long-term investing, where we discuss three promising stocks you can hold for the long haul. Click here to get your free report today!



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



