It's tough to analyze Chevron (NYSE: CVX), the second-largest of the U.S.-based major oil companies, behind only ExxonMobil (NYSE: XOM), and not emerge with the conviction that the company deserves to be a core holding in Foolish energy portfolios.
Oh sure, Exxon and Netherlands-based Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE: RDS-B) are hardly chopped liver, but Chevron boasts some special assets that, in my mind, make the company a standout in the group. For instance, its balance sheet is hardly short of cash, its per-barrel profitability is exemplary, its dividend is solid, and its natural gas concentration is overseas, where prices have fared far better than in the U.S.
A year-over-year dip, but a major beat
As was the case with most of the rest of the industry, however, Chevron's net income for the second quarter slid to $7.21 billion, or $3.66 per share, compared with $7.73 billion, or $3.85 per share in 2011. Nevertheless, the latest per-share figure topped the consensus expectation of analysts who follow the company by a whopping $0.42. The company's top line came in at $60 billion, versus $67 billion for the comparable quarter a year ago.
In the upstream sector, George Kirkland, the head of the company's exploration and production operations, noted that, thus far in reporting season, the company is nearly $7 per barrel ahead of its peers in per-barrel margins, which were about $26 per barrel in the quarter. At the same time, however, Chevron's oil-equivalent barrels of production averaged 2.63 million BOE a day for the first half of the year. That figure compares to 2.68 billion daily BOE to which management guided for the full year in January. The average price realization thus far in the year is $114 Brent per barrel.
According to Kirkland, here are "four key drivers" that will affect Chevron's full-year production results: First, there has been a months-long shut-in at the Frade field offshore Brazil in the face of a pair of oil spills in the Chevron-operated project. Second, the company is about to embark on its initial six-week turnaround (maintenance stoppage) at the giant Tengiz field in Kazakhstan. Third, Chevron has experienced commissioning delays at the Angola LNG operation. Finally -- and positively -- are the startups of several projects vis-a-vis expectations.
Where it's working
Regarding areas of conventional exploration and production for the year, the company will invest nearly $3 billion in the Gulf of Mexico. Indeed, in the recent lease sale, it appears that Chevron was high bidder for 15 blocks each in the deepwater and on the continental shelf. Furthermore, it has announced its fourth discovery in the Carnarvon Basin of Australia. Other test areas on the company's docket for the year include South America and West Africa.
Highly unconventional
As for unconventional plays, Chevron is pursuing projects in a number of areas, including the Permian Basin and the Marcellus shale of the U.S. It's also conducting unconventional exploration in the Duvernay of Canada, Poland, Argentina, and China. In addition, it's been awarded a tender in Ukraine that gives it the right to negotiate a production-sharing contract for 1,600 acres.
The company has announced that it will proceed with the development of the Lianzi field, which straddles a unitized offshore zone between the Republic of Congo and the Republic of Angola. Development of the field, which is located about 65 miles offshore, is likely to involve an expenditure near $2.0 billion. At the same time, the company will spend another $500 million to increase its natural gas production in Bangladesh by 2014.
Its hike downstream
Downstream, Chevron earned $1.88 billion, pushed along by the favorable combination of a 7% decline in Brent crude, which serves as the benchmark for two-thirds of the world. Profits from the sector included $200 million from the sale of a South Korean power business, along with other assets.
Chevron is in the process of developing a pair of major Australian LNG projects, on which it serves as operator. The Wheatstone is well into the development stage, following a final decision on the project nearly a month ago. The larger Gorgon project is further along -- currently about 45%. On the latter, Kirkland said, "We are making good progress on our 2012 milestones."
Chevron hardly will be hindered by a less-than-robust balance sheet going forward. The company finished the quarter with about $21.5 billion in cash and equivalents, along with marketable securities. When weighed against $10.2 billion in short- and long-term debt, its net cash position just might signal acquisition activity in the reasonably near term.
CFO Pat Yarrington concluded management's formal remarks on the call with analysts by saying:
The Foolish bottom line
Yarrington obviously believes Chevron is the most attractive investment among the world's major oil companies. I'm hard-pressed to disagree. And while I've suggested that a Foolish portfolio would benefit from the inclusion of such oil-field leaders as Schlumberger and National Oilwell Varco, I also believe they'd be inclined to flourish with inclusion of Chevron shares.
At the very least, I urge Foolish investors to include Chevron in their versions of My Watchlist.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



Chevron (NYSE: CVX) reported earnings on July 27. Here are the numbers you need to know.
The 10-second takeaway
For the quarter ended June 30 (Q2), Chevron beat expectations on revenue and beat expectations on earnings per share.
Compared to the prior-year quarter, revenue dropped and GAAP earnings per share shrank.
Gross margins expanded, operating margins were steady, and net margins contracted.
Revenue details
Chevron tallied revenue of $59.78 billion. The three analysts polled by S&P Capital IQ expected to see a top line of $58.37 billion on the same basis. GAAP reported sales were 6.0% lower than the prior-year quarter's $64.41 billion.
Source: S&P Capital IQ. Quarterly periods. Dollar amounts in millions. Non-GAAP figures may vary to maintain comparability with estimates.
EPS details
EPS came in at $3.56. The 16 earnings estimates compiled by S&P Capital IQ predicted $3.24 per share. GAAP EPS of $3.66 for Q2 were 4.9% lower than the prior-year quarter's $3.85 per share.
Source: S&P Capital IQ. Quarterly periods. Non-GAAP figures may vary to maintain comparability with estimates.
Margin details
For the quarter, gross margin was 39.2%, 710 basis points better than the prior-year quarter. Operating margin was 17.0%, about the same as the prior-year quarter. Net margin was 11.9%, 10 basis points worse than the prior-year quarter.
Looking ahead
Next quarter's average estimate for revenue is $57.90 billion. On the bottom line, the average EPS estimate is $2.95.
Next year's average estimate for revenue is $253.26 billion. The average EPS estimate is $12.60.
Investor sentiment
The stock has a five-star rating (out of five) at Motley Fool CAPS, with 4,034 members out of 4,195 rating the stock outperform, and 161 members rating it underperform. Among 984 CAPS All-Star picks (recommendations by the highest-ranked CAPS members), 960 give Chevron a green thumbs-up, and 24 give it a red thumbs-down.
Of Wall Street recommendations tracked by S&P Capital IQ, the average opinion on Chevron is outperform, with an average price target of $123.42.
Can your portfolio provide you with enough income to last through retirement? You'll need more than Chevron. Learn how to maximize your investment income and "Secure Your Future With 9 Rock-Solid Dividend Stocks." Click here for instant access to this free report.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



