In May, I announced my intention to create a portfolio that embodied life's basic needs. To that end, over a period of 10 weeks I detailed 10 diverse companies that I think will outperform the broad-based S&P 500 over a three-year period because of their ability to outperform in both bull and bear markets, as well as command incredible pricing power in nearly any economic environment.
If you'd like a closer look at my reasoning behind each selection, just click on any, or all, of the following portfolio components:
Let's look at how our portfolio of basic-needs stocks fared last week.
Company
Cost Basis
Shares
Total Value
Return
Waste Management
$42.60
23.24
$1,071.36
8.2%
Intel
$23.22
42.64
$1,017.82
2.8%
NextEra Energy
$87.94
11.26
$975.00
(1.5%)
MasterCard
$645.57
1.53
$1,154.31
16.9%
Chevron
$124.95
7.93
$983.56
(0.7%)
Select Medical
$8.96
110.49
$948.00
(4.2%)
Ford
$17.50
56.57
$962.26
(2.8%)
American Water Works
$43.13
22.96
$969.14
(2.1%)
Procter & Gamble
$81.29
12.18
$1,034.69
4.5%
AvalonBay Communities
$133.95
7.39
$868.77
(12.2%)
Cash
$0.88
Dividends receivable
$83.78
Total commission
($100.00)
Original investment
$10,000.00
Total portfolio value
$10,069.57
0.7%
S&P 500 performance
5.6%
Performance relative to S&P 500
(4.9%)
SOURCE: YAHOO! FINANCE, AUTHOR'S CALCULATIONS.
Show me the money!
I've said it before and I'll say it again -- one of the greatest allures of basic needs stocks is nearly guaranteed cash flow that often leads to consistent and growing dividend payments. This past week we received a payment, and another company declared its upcoming quarterly distribution.
Our payment came from hospital and outpatient rehabilitation center operator Select Medical (NYSE:SEM
) which divvied out a $0.10-per-share payout on Friday. Hospitals aren't often known for large dividends, as uncollected revenue from treated patients who are uninsured or underinsured often makes it difficult for hospitals to confidently pay out much of their cash flow. Select Medical, though, has cost-cutting measures in place, as well as Obamacare in its sails, which should help maintain its portfolio-leading yield of 4.7%.
In addition to the received dividend payment, residential REIT AvalonBay Communities (NYSE:AVB
) announced a fourth-quarter dividend of $1.07 per share payable on Jan. 15, 2014, to shareholders on record as of Dec. 31. With lending rates hovering near a four-month low, AvalonBay has taken a bit of a beating recently since it operates rental communities throughout the U.S. that tend to see better pricing power and demand when rates move higher and push people away from buying a home. With the end of the Federal Reserve's monetary easing program, QE3, in sight, I see no reason why we shouldn't expect lending rates to ease off their lows and give AvalonBay a long-term boost.
Also in the news
Chipmaker Intel (NASDAQ:INTC
) had a rough ending to last week after noting at its investor meeting that upcoming sales for fiscal 2014 would be similar to those of 2013 ($52.6 billion). Compared to Wall Street expectations, that would mean a sales shortfall of up to $1 billion. Gross margin for the processing giant is expected to range between 55% and 65%, which was in line with expectations. Intel is having to play catch-up to its peers with PC sales on a rapid decline and mobile-device sales taking off. In the interim that means spending quite a bit on research and development, which hurts margins and slows its ability to boost profits. It's unpleasant over the short term for shareholders, but Intel still looks poised for success in the cloud and in mobile over the long run.
It wasn't exactly rosy news for Chevron (NYSE:CVX
)last week, either. The integrated oil and gas company announced late in the week that, at least for the time being, it would not develop its Rosebank oil project, which is offshore north of Scotland, as the cost to work these deposits could equal as much as $10 billion. Discoveries haven't been the issue for oil and gas exploration and production companies like Chevron -- the feasible costs to develop these assets is really the conundrum. No decision has been made yet as to what Chevron will do with the asset, but shareholders expecting a pop from Rosebank can probably cross it off the list for the time being. 
Finally, automaker Ford (NYSE:F
) announced on Thursday that it would invest $150 million in its Buffalo Stamping Plant to add jobs and expand operations that include production of components used on its F-Series pickups, Edge, Focus, and Econoline. Ford is clicking on all cylinders and can certainly afford to spend extra on R&D and operational improvements if it hopes to keep running toe-to-toe with General Motors domestically and Honda and Toyota abroad.
Back to basics
It was another rough week relative to the S&P 500, with high-growth companies, IPOs, and other speculative issues pushing investor sentiment higher. These 10 basic needs stocks certainly weren't chosen to keep pace with a nearly hyperbolic market, but should be primed, thanks to a slew of dividends that are always in the works and a steady stream of cash flow, to outperform the S&P 500 over this three-year experiment.
Check back next week for the latest update on this portfolio and its 10 components.



Before you consider Intel Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Intel Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Energy giant Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) has enjoyed a strong 2013, giving investors a solid 18% positive total return for the year and easily outpacing the 13% return that rival ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
) has had this year. But the Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI
) have performed even better, with the average soaring almost 23% so far in 2013. What's behind Chevron's mixed performance, and how can it keep up its competitive position more effectively in the future?
Chevron stands out from most of its peers not for what it has done but for what it has not. Rather than following the lead of many rivals by breaking up into component upstream exploration and production and downstream refining and marketing arms, Chevron and ExxonMobil have both remained integrated oil giants. By doing so, Chevron hopes to reap the best of both worlds, but its sheer size makes sustaining production and finding growth opportunities a constant challenge. Let's take a closer look at what moved shares of Chevron in 2013.
Stats on Chevron
Current Trailing P/E
10
1-year revenue growth
(4.8%)
1-year earnings growth
(1.3%)
Dividend yield
3.2%
SOURCE: S&P CAPITAL IQ.

CHEVRON TOTAL RETURN PRICE DATA BY YCHARTS.
What's behind Chevron's results in 2013?
As you can see above, Chevron has had an up and down year, following the Dow's downdrafts fairly closely. Yet in October, Chevron's returns disconnected from the Dow's bigger rise, and lagging Exxon posted a big comeback that eliminated half of the gap between its returns and Chevron's.
One of the big issues that Chevron has faced all year has been the geopolitical situation around the world, especially in the Middle East. With the Syrian conflict ramping up throughout the year amid allegations of chemical-weapons use, the U.S. found itself on the brink of military action. But a diplomatic solution brokered by Russia to have Syria destroy its chemical weapons assets helped prevent oil prices from moving sharply higher. Just this past weekend, a preliminary agreement to the long-standing dispute about suspected Iranian nuclear-weapons activities sent oil prices plunging, as the easing of sanctions against Iran could resolve supply concerns. That might be good news for the economy, but it could lead to continued pressure on Chevron's revenue going forward if prices keep weakening.
For Chevron specifically, though, continuing to find lucrative opportunities for production growth remains the biggest challenge. Chevron has generally done a better job than Exxon in making and developing major finds, with Australia being its major standout for massive natural-gas fields that it hopes to use to drive exports of liquefied-natural-gas to energy-hungry markets in India, China, and the rest of the geographically convenient Asia-Pacific region. Chevron also has eyed West Africa, the Gulf of Mexico, and South America for further development, as well as keeping a production presence in Iraq and Saudi Arabia.
Chevron has looked beyond its traditional oil and gas business for opportunities. Like Exxon and Royal Dutch Shell, Chevron expects to invest heavily in its refining and chemicals businesses, hoping to take advantage of cheap feedstocks from independent oil and gas producers and diversify their overall exposure to the energy business. In particular, efforts to produce more ethylene and polypropylene could help Chevron serve the plastics manufacturing industry. As long as cheap energy is available, Chevron has the opportunity to take on these massive projects that are too large for small oil and gas companies.
Finally, Chevron's ongoing legal battle over environmental contamination in Ecuador has been a multibillion-dollar distraction to its core business. Although Chevron managed to get an Ecuadoran court's original $19 billion verdict cut in half, the true test for the oil giant involves its U.S. federal court case alleging that the entire verdict should be nullified on the basis of fraud.
Overall, Chevron stock has held up quite well given the less-than-perfect conditions in the energy industry over the past year. As long as Chevron can keep making global finds that are big enough to move the needle on its already huge business, it should be able to keep up with or surpass its Big OIl peers.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Click here to add Chevron to My Watchlist, which can find all of our Foolish analysis on it and all your other stocks.
