This article is part of our Innovation in America series, in which Foolish writers highlight examples of innovation going on today and what they see coming in the future.
The International Energy Agency estimates that the global demand for oil will still be climbing by 2035, despite advances in renewable resources. In the face of that reality, maximizing oil production is now more important than ever. That production is being driven not by new equipment, but by vast amounts of data. In a most unexpected way, innovation has come to the oil patch.
The original oil field
The first American oil fields weren't oil fields at all; they were salt fields. In the early 1800s, oil was being discovered accidentally in salt wells in Kentucky, West Virginia, Ohio, and Pennsylvania. The pesky black stuff was getting in the way of salt manufacturers. There was so much of it, someone eventually came up with a use for it. The oil, used mostly as a liniment, was believed to have curative properties and was bottled and sold. Occasionally prescribed as a treatment for cholera, bronchitis, and consumption, patients drank three teaspoons, three times a day.
We've come a long way in our use of petroleum, but the days of oil simply showing up if you dug a hole in the ground are also long gone. Now, resources are harder to find and even harder to produce. Two innovations in the oil field -- horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing -- have completely changed energy production in the U.S. It is the oil field itself that is being innovated now, and the world's top producers are hoping this will have an even bigger effect on the industry.
Innovative beginnings
In 2003, Chevron (NYSE: CVX) partnered with the University of Southern California to create the Center for Interactive Smart Oilfield Technologies, or CiSoft. The goal of the partnership is to research and develop smart oil-field technologies in areas including integrated asset management, well productivity improvement, reservoir management, and data management tools.
Chevron is one of a handful of oil majors to implement the digital oil field, and the company hopes its "i-field" concept will improve performance at its 40 largest energy developments. It estimates that digitally optimizing an oil field will increase production rates by 8% and grow overall resource recovery by 6%.
The Chevron i-fields are monitored by eight control centers around the world that are each focused on a specific goal, ranging from drilling operations to imaging reservoirs. Two control centers in Houston focus on drilling and machinery support. There is one control center that monitors deepwater drilling in Lagos, Nigeria, and another in Covington, La.
The control centers are fed information from thousands of tiny sensors -- some as small as a millimeter -- that Chevron has installed throughout its assets. The sensors take readings like pressure and temperature and can even help map underground fuel deposits. The data is then transmitted to a control center.
The amount of data pulled from oil-field sensors can be a bit overwhelming: 1.5 terabytes of data travel over the company's network every day. But managing and analyzing that data is quite worthwhile. Chevron estimates it will save $1 billion annually as production increases and expensive accidents are avoided.
Researchers at IBM (NYSE: IBM) get much more specific with the return on investment. The company has determined that over the course of 10 years, when applied to a $2 billion mature oil and gas field, a $74 million investment in smart oil-field technology will yield $326 million in benefits.
Teamwork
Of course, while Chevron is forward-thinking in implementing its i-field, companies like Microsoft (NYSE: MSFT), IBM, and Halliburton (NYSE: HAL) offer sophisticated IT solutions for the oil and gas industry. The companies develop software and offer consulting services that help oil companies make sense of the mounds of data generated by their smart oil fields.
This is where the real value in smart oil fields lies. Sensors can generate plenty of data, but if there is no one on the other end to make sense of it all, it is of little help. Advancements in the consolidation and interpretation of data will go a long way toward increasing production and reserve recovery -- and, perhaps more importantly, improving the safety of operations.
Foolish takeaway
Technological advancement will continue to change the way we produce energy, and the best investments will be the companies like Chevron that embrace the change early. For more insight on the disruptive powers of technology, click here to access the Fool's special free report: "The Future is Made in America."
Read more about innovation today and its future in America; head back to the series intro for links to the entire series.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



Mixed news often produces a lack of direction in the stock market. Despite a slight 1.3% rise in home prices in the U.S., consumer confidence fell for the fourth month in a row. When you combine that with ongoing nervousness about how European nations will address the growing financial crisis across the Atlantic, you get investors who don't know which way to push stock prices. By 10:45 a.m. EDT, the Dow Jones (INDEX: ^DJI) had given up its opening gains and was down 23 points.
Within the Dow, a slight reprieve from the recent weakness in oil prices helped boost shares of Chevron (NYSE: CVX) and ExxonMobil (NYSE: XOM). But even with a slight gain, crude oil remains below the $80-per-barrel mark, and even innovation like Chevron's CiSoft initiative can't eliminate the importance of high energy prices for the oil giants' earnings.
Microsoft (Nasdaq: MSFT) rose almost 1% after confirming yesterday its acquisition of social networking company Yammer for $1.2 billion. As Fool analyst Isaac Pino noted earlier this morning, Microsoft is among the cheapest stocks in the Dow, even after a roughly 15% gain so far in 2012. Whether Yammer will help Microsoft continue to produce its high returns on invested capital remains to be seen, but it's clear that the software giant needs to take steps to move forward rather than simply relying on legacy products.
Leading the way in the Dow, though, was JPMorgan Chase (NYSE: JPM), which jumped nearly 1.5% after getting an upgrade from fellow Wall Street investment bank Goldman Sachs. The Goldman analyst pointed to strong showings from CEO Jamie Dimon before Congress as a solid indicator of future performance and argued that the stock has been beaten down disproportionately far after its multibillion-dollar losses from its recent trading mishaps.
Don't fall flat
Just because the market isn't doing anything big today doesn't mean you can't position yourself to earn large profits in the future. The Fool's latest special report can get you moving in the right direction --  it points the way to the three Dow stocks dividend investors need. The report is absolutely free, so just click here and get your copy today.



Before you consider Microsoft Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Microsoft Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



As has often happened lately, the stock market has had some fairly strong swings today. After a small bounce at the open, the stock market got off to a slow start this morning, falling as investors grappled with conflicting information about the macroeconomic picture in the U.S. and around the world. The market moved strongly higher in the afternoon, and by around 2:45 p.m. EDT, the Dow Jones Industrial Average (INDEX: ^DJI) was up 58 points, just below the highs of the session.
Too often, though, investors focus only on the Dow rather than digging deeper into other financial markets. Let's take a look at some lesser-followed investments that also have an impact on overall portfolio performance:
Today's performance points to a nicely positive day for stocks generally. In the broader context of the market's downward moves since the beginning of May, however, today's move upward doesn't appear to be a strong or lasting reversal of that downward trend.
Keep your focus
What markets do on any given day isn't nearly as important as what they do in the long run. If you want to get into stocks that can help you in the long run and prefer to stick with the Dow's blue chip favorites, let me suggest reading the Fool's latest special report, which recommends three Dow stocks dividend investors need. The report is absolutely free, so just click here and get your copy today.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



The sun is out, temperatures around the country are soaring, and white dresses are all the rage -- summer is officially here! However, suntans and sweltering heat aren't the only things that typically accompany the start of summer.
Rising prices at the gas pump are another common occurrence in the summer, as people take more time off from work and refiners produce a pricier blend of fuel for summer driving months. Between the combination of heat and high prices, you're bound to hear a complaint or 20 about the high price of petrol while filling up your vehicle.
Today, I plan to tackle the complaint that gas prices are too high and simply show you the other side of the argument.
Gripe No. 1: "High oil and gas prices are all OPEC's fault."
The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is made up of 12 Middle Eastern, African, and South American countries -- many of which aren't on the best terms with the United States, politically. It has been the subject of finger-pointing for pretty much the last half-century.
At one time in OPEC's history, it could indeed control oil production and affect prices. In the mid-1970s, Iran and many other Arab nations spearheaded an effort to cut off exports to Israel's allies, effectively driving up the price of gasoline in the U.S.
However, as time has passed, OPEC's production capabilities haven't improved by much. Perhaps this is due to the unstable political structures in many of these countries, or it could have to do with limited land and technology resources available; either way, production has stagnated. In 1980, OPEC was able to produce close to 30 million barrels per day. From 2005 through 2012, production ranged between 30 million and 33 million barrels per day -- a very small increase from 30 years prior. At the same time, non-OPEC production, which includes finds in Russia and the U.S., has soared and now constitutes the majority of oil produced today. Non-OPEC nations supplied 57% of all oil in 2011, compared with just 43% for OPEC nations.
Simply put, OPEC doesn't have the pricing control it once had, so stop the finger-pointing!
Gripe No. 2: "The U.S. Government's gas tax is nickel-and-diming us to death!"
Everyone is probably well aware that the U.S. government is taxing us on each gallon of fuel that we pump into our cars. But most people fail to realize just how lucky we are relative to the rest of the industrialized world when it comes to paying taxes on fuel.
Although there are people out there paying as little as $0.09 per gallon for fuel, U.S. citizens should be thanking their lucky stars that gas prices have only been as high as $4 per gallon.

Source: Bloomberg.
The disparity in this graph is huge. According to a recent survey by Bloomberg of 55 countries, the U.S. paid the 44th-highest price for gas. The reason we rank so low is that the U.S. government subsidizes a good portion of what we pay, and the final tax is only $0.184 per gallon. Now compare this to Germany and France, which tack on taxes of $4.88 and $5.40 per gallon, and you should begin feeling a bit more grateful for what we pay at the pump. Such comparatively high taxes can mean huge social benefits, such as the taxes completely subsidizing citizens' college educations in Norway, but they can also be a significant financial hindrance to citizens.
Gripe No. 3: "I spend too much money on gas already for it to move even higher!"
Gas prices are elevated -- no doubt about it! "Sticker shock" has a lot of people at least contending that they'll drive less this summer in order to conserve money. But let's dig a bit deeper than just nominal gas prices, and I'll show you why this gripe also doesn't hold water.
One key factor often overlooked when tracing gasoline's exponential climb higher is inflation:

Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration.
Over time, things get more expensive, including gasoline. Although the nominal price of gasoline has risen by nearly 600% since 1976, the real price (adjusted for inflation) is up by roughly 40%. That's not menial by any means, but it's also not the backbreaker some people have made it out to be.
Another factor that drivers overlook is that cars are considerably more fuel-efficient than they were just 30 years ago:

Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration.
You can see that although the inflation-adjusted price of gasoline is similar now to what it was in 1980, fuel efficiency has drastically reduced the cost we as drivers incur per mile in inflation-adjusted dollars. This effect is only bound to get more pronounced as General Motors (NYSE: GM), Ford (NYSE: F), and Toyota Motor (NYSE: TM) agreed in July 2011 to double fuel efficiency to an average of 54.5 miles per gallon by 2025.
You're probably now wondering, "Then why do I feel like I spend so much on gas at the pump?" The answer to that question is simple: real wage growth stinks!

Source: St. Louis Federal Reserve; Data360.org. Based on private-sector hourly earnings.
Although nominal wages have tripled from $6.57 to nearly $20 per hour since 1980, the negative effects of inflation have reduced that 200% gain to a measly 1.51% real wage increase -- in 32 years! Compare this 1.51% real pay raise to gasoline's 40% bump, and there's your answer to why gas feels like it costs more.
Gripe No. 4: "Gas companies are making too much!"
There has long been a perception that gas companies are making too much and are "inherently evil." I actually may hear this gripe more than any others combined. And as with the previous gripes, there really isn't much substance to this complaint.
In January 2012, the average tax consumers paid on gasoline in the U.S. (federal plus state taxes) was $0.488 per gallon. According to ExxonMobil (NYSE: XOM), in fiscal 2010 the oil and gas giant only made -- get this -- $0.02 per gallon on gasoline! In addition, between 2006 and 2010, ExxonMobil paid $59 billion in corporate taxes to the U.S. government. Chevron (NYSE: CVX) similarly makes only about $0.02 per gallon in profit from its gasoline sales. Now tell me this: Who is really making the big bucks off of gasoline? Federal and state governments, which are taxing citizens at 48.8 cents per gallon, or oil companies paying billions in corporate taxes while making about $0.02 per gallon?
The last time I checked, capitalism wasn't evil, and neither are these giant oil and gas companies.
Foolish roundup
Are there those of you out there who are going to vehemently disagree with me? I don't doubt it! But I hope this presents the other side of the argument -- that neither OPEC nor oil companies are the direct cause of your pain at the pump. It's really a combination of poor wage growth and a disassociation with the effects of inflation that have people on edge about gas prices. We really don't pay very much for gas relative to other industrialized countries, and we should be thankful for the current level of gas prices.
Agree? Disagree? Want to throw water balloons at me? Tell me and your fellow Fools about it in the comments section below.
One thing you don't have to gripe about is that with energy prices as high as they are, there are plenty of investing opportunities in the oil and gas sector. Our team of analysts at Motley Fool Stock Advisor has hand-picked three stocks they expect to outperform if oil tops $100 per barrel again. Find out the companies' identities by clicking here to get your copy of this free report.



Before you consider Ford Motor Company, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Ford Motor Company wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



