The oil industry has had had a strange decade as the seeming rise and fall of oil stocks have happened over and over again. The decade started with depressed demand because of a global recession, but ended with surging oil demand in the U.S. and abroad as SUV sales increased and the global economy made a slow but steady recovery. 
2020 changed everything and brought out the industry's warts, as a global pandemic hit demand across the world. Prices even went negative for a short time. This dynamic has hurt oil stocks that have for the most part been in decline over the last two years. And we may already be seeing the end of oil's dominance in energy on the horizon. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The first thing to look at for oil stocks is what direction operations are headed. Is revenue rising? Are margins improving or at least staying steady? Or is the business generally in decline? 
To get a broad look at where the oil industry is headed, take a look at the chart below, which shows revenue and operating margins for ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), Chevron (NYSE:CVX), and Royal Dutch Shell (LSE:RDSA). These three companies are big and diverse, giving us a big-picture view of the oil industry today. 

XOM REVENUE (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS. TTM = TRAILING 12 MONTHS.
What you can see is that revenue and margins are in a long-term decline. Those aren't good trends for the industry and tell us a little bit about why oil stocks are in decline. But understanding why they are performing poorly also says a lot. 
On the demand side, oil isn't in a terrible position, but there are some negative signs. You can see below that global oil consumption continues to grow steadily, but in the U.S., consumption has been flat for two decades and was in a steady decline until the last five years, when an economic boom drove increased SUV sales. 

US OIL CONSUMPTION DATA BY YCHARTS.
There are a number of factors affecting oil margins, but there are a few that stand out: 
In reality, there's a limit on growth and margins for oil companies. And that limits the opportunity for investors. 
Everything I've laid out indicates that oil companies are in for a structural decline in operations over the next few decades. And these aren't crazy to point out because oil companies themselves agree with the bleak assessment. 
BP said in its 2020 energy outlook that demand for oil will fall over the next 30 years as EVs take market share. Management has also said it will produce less oil a decade from now than it does today as it invests more in cleaner energy investments. 
The Wall Street Journal recently reported that ExxonMobil has also cut its expectations for oil prices by between 11% and 17% versus previous projections. The company has also released plans to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, a huge shift for the oil giant.
If big oil thinks the best days are behind us, then what should we expect but a decline in the industry. 
All indications are that oil is in for a decline in demand over the next decade or more, and that won't help the operations of any oil stocks. Some companies will strike oil and beat the market, and others may make a successful shift to renewable energy. But there are better energy investments than buying into a dying industry and hoping it can make a shift to a new industry altogether. I would stay far away from oil stocks today. 




Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



Energy stocks significantly underperformed broader markets in 2020. Not just small names, but leading oil and gas stocks also got crushed during the year. A steep fall in the demand for oil products due to the coronavirus pandemic disrupted oil prices as well as the performance of oil companies. With 2020 ending, what lies ahead for energy stocks? Let's discuss the factors at play which will decide the fate of energy companies in 2021.
Top integrated oil stocks, including Chevron (NYSE:CVX), ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.A) (NYSE:RDS.B), and BP (NYSE:BP), got pummeled in 2020. While BP fell more than 40%, Chevron is down more than 25% year to date. With its massive capital plans, ExxonMobil had a particularly rough year. Royal Dutch Shell's dividend cut, for the first time in 75 years, speaks volumes about how bad things were for energy companies. Energy sector stocks substantially underperformed the S&P 500 Index, which is up more than 14% year to date.

XLE DATA BY YCHARTS
Crude oil prices -- which hovered around an average of $57 per barrel in 2019 -- tumbled in March, even entering negative territory temporarily. West Texas Intermediate prices averaged around $39 per barrel in 2020.
Indeed, oil companies found it difficult to make profits at those price levels. As with any commodity, the demand-supply dynamics largely dictate the trends in oil prices.
In response to the throttled demand due to the pandemic, oil and gas producers curtailed their outputs. Weekly U.S. crude oil production fell to a low of 9.7 million barrels per day in August -- a level it hasn't seen since January 2018 -- before rising to 11.1 million bpd in December. The production is still notably lower than around 13.1 million bpd in March. On average, 2020 U.S. crude oil production was 6% lower than in 2019.
Globally, OPEC and its partner countries largely kept the agreement of a 7.7 million bpd collective cut in the output. A resurgence in coronavirus cases, mainly in Europe and the U.S., has led to sustained weakness in oil demand. As a result, OPEC and its partners plan to increase oil output by just 0.5 million bpd in January, against an earlier plan of raising output by 2 million bpd. The oil cartel will hopefully manage to keep the needed production cuts in place in 2021, but that's far from a certainty. Member countries have failed to agree on cuts, or have been noncompliant on the agreed cuts, several times in the past.
Gasoline demand bounced back in the summer driving season. However, it was short-lived, as the rising coronavirus cases once again pushed demand down. In comparison, demand for distillate fuel, comprising of diesel and other heavier fuels, seem to be holding better.

US FINISHED MOTOR GASOLINE PRODUCT SUPPLIED DATA BY YCHARTS
The International Energy Agency expects global oil demand to rise by 5.8 million bpd in 2021. The Agency expects a vaccine could help boost demand only by the second half of 2021.
In the U.S., the Energy Information Administration expects oil production to gradually get back to pre-pandemic levels in 2021. Still, the average production is expected to be 11.1 million bpd, down from 11.3 million bpd in 2020 and 12.2 million bpd in 2019. The Agency expects gasoline consumption in the U.S. to rise from 8.09 million bpd in 2020 to 8.76 million bpd. Notably, that's still lower than the average consumption of 9.31 million bpd in 2019. Finally, the EIA expects WTI prices to average $45.8 per barrel in 2021, up from an average of around $39 per barrel in 2020.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Though EIA's estimates haven't been the most reliable ones recently, the expected modest improvements in demand and prices seem realistic. The pace of global recovery has been uneven so far. Though demand bounced back quickly from the lows of April, the recovery has been far slower after that.
I expect a slow yet steady recovery in oil products demand and prices in 2021, though not to pre-pandemic levels. Rising coronavirus cases may keep a lid on demand in the first half, until an effective vaccine reaches to the bulk of global population. That should support energy stock prices, though I don't expect them to climb sharply. Finally, as always, OPEC is a wild card that may make oil prices and stocks volatile.
Among energy stocks, Chevron looks promising due to its strong balance sheet and low-cost production. In the refining segment, Valero Energy's (NYSE:VLO) lower operating expenses position it well for the challenging market. It could be a great addition to any value investor's portfolio.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


