Investors eyeing Hercules Offshore (NASDAQ:HERO.DL
) to be one of their portfolio champions could very well be looking in the right direction. The recent divestment  of its under performing domestic lifeboat and inland segments is but a preamble to the company's recent moves to turn itself into a more geographically diversified operation.
In May, I announced my intention to create a portfolio that embodied life's basic needs. Understandably, many of the truly basic needs in our everyday lives have transcended far beyond just the need for water and shelter. To that end, over a period of 10 weeks I detailed 10 diverse companies that I think will outperform the broad-based S&P 500 over a three-year period because of their ability to outperform in both bull and bear markets, and command incredible pricing power in nearly any economic environment.
If you'd like a closer look at what my reasoning was behind each selection, you can do so by clicking on any, or all, of the following portfolio components:
Let's look at how our portfolio of basic needs stocks fared this week.
Company
Cost Basis
Shares
Total Value
Return
Waste Management
$42.60
23.24
$978.87
(1.1%)
Intel
$23.22
42.64
$956.84
(3.4%)
NextEra Energy 
$87.94
11.26
$916.68
(7.4%)
MasterCard
$645.57
1.53
$957.95
(3%)
Chevron
$124.95
7.93
$947.87
(4.3%)
Select Medical 
$8.96
110.49
$936.96
(5.4%)
Ford 
$17.50
56.57
$930.58
(6%)
American Water Works 
$43.13
22.96
$961.56
(2.9%)
Procter & Gamble
$81.29
12.18
$974.52
(1.6%)
AvalonBay Communities
$133.95
7.39
$932.84
(5.8%)
Cash
$0.88
Dividends receivable
$0
Total commission
($100.00)
Original investment
$10,000.00
Total portfolio value
$9,495.55
(5%)
S&P 500 performance
(2.7%)
Performance relative to S&P 500
(2.3%)
SOURCES: YAHOO! FINANCE, AUTHOR'S CALCULATIONS.
As has been the case in previous weeks, with many big-profile names in the Basic Needs Portfolio you get a wide variance in news stories. Here are five that caught my attention this week.
Analyst actions
Last week we were talking about Intel (NASDAQ:INTC
) being downgraded by R.W. Baird to "neutral." This week it's the exact opposite, with Piper Jaffray upgrading Intel to "neutral" from "underweight" and setting a $22 price target on shares. It still should be noted that Piper Jaffray's target is below where Intel is trading currently, so it's not particularly optimistic on the company, but it does see Intel's potential to win decent market share in tablets as enough reason to issue an upgrade. Between cloud computing, tablet wins, and its ongoing cash cow that is the PC microprocessor market, Intel remains one of the most attractive long-term buy-and-hold stocks in the tech sector.
Dividend news
On Thursday, refuse service provider Waste Management (NYSE:WM
) declared a quarterly dividend of $0.365 (the same as in the previous quarter) that will be payable on Sept. 20 to shareholders on record as of Sept. 6. It's not shocking to see Waste Management keep its dividend steady, since its increases are usually announced in the fourth quarter. In addition, metal prices have been weak, which has put a slight damper on Waste Management's recycling business. Nonetheless, shareholders are currently enjoying a 3.5% annual yield.
Also in the news
Shares of payment processor MasterCard (NYSE:MA
) and Visa received a slight boost this week, after the Federal Reserve announced an appeal to a court ruling that overturned a $0.21 cap on fees charged to retail stores for debit-card transactions. Right now both companies can charge fees of as much as $0.50 for debit-card transactions, and an overturn would certainly work in the favor of MasterCard and Visa. The good news (for this portfolio) is that even if the fees stick, Visa has a much larger percentage of debit-card market share in the U.S., so it would feel the brunt of the pain relative to MasterCard.
Shareholders in Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) received some potentially optimistic news on Friday, with Pemex, the world's fifth-largest producer of crude in Mexico, reporting its lowest monthly oil production in approximately 18 years. On the heels of nine straight years of declining production, Mexican President Enrique Pena Nieto earlier this month introduced a bill that would allow for private companies like Chevron to be able to enter the currently government-run oil industry in Mexico. Chevron is always looking for ways to expand its asset base and improve the U.S. oil import picture, and this could be just another piece to that puzzle.
Finally, shareholders of Procter & Gamble (NYSE:PG
) have to be a bit miffed after finding out that recently departed CEO Bob McDonald made $15.9 million in total compensation last year -- a 5% raise over the previous year. Many have praised the return of A.G. Lafley, who has been largely credited with building value in P&G's core brands, while Bob McDonald spent heavily on advertising only to see minimal sales improvement. Hopefully this is the last time we have to be sidetracked by Bob McDonald's unmemorable run as CEO and can instead focus on P&G's push into international markets.
Back to basics
It was a pretty flat week overall this week, with the Basic Needs Portfolio slightly outpacing the modest gains by the S&P 500. As a reminder, we now have six stocks in this portfolio set to pay out a dividend between Aug. 30 and Sept. 20, so keep that in mind when you compare the slight underperformance in this group of stocks relative to the S&P 500 thus far. This portfolio is set up to help you sleep at night while earning solid dividend income and outperforming in any market. Over the next three years, I expect double-digit outperformance.
Check back next week for the latest update on this portfolio and its 10 components.


Before you consider Intel Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Intel Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Although we don't believe in timing the market or panicking over daily movements, we do like to keep an eye on market changes -- just in case they're material to our investing thesis.
This morning investors were given some rather discouraging news about the state of the U.S. economy, yet the major indexes are all rising today. As of 12:50 p.m. EDT the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI
) has gained 25 points, or 0.16%, while the S&P 500 is up by 0.24% and the Nasdaq is 0.66% higher.
The poor economic data came in the form of a much weaker-than-expected durable-goods number for July. In July, orders for goods that will last three years or more fell 7.3%. That's the first decline in four months and the biggest drop since August of 2012. Expectations weren't high for July -- Wall Street had anticipated a 4% slide for the month -- but the 7.3% slide was quite the surprise. 
Now let's take a look at a few Dow components that are dragging on the index today.
Shares of Microsoft (NASDAQ:MSFT
) are down 0.7% today. The stock rose more than 7% last Friday alone and 9.3% over the last five trading days. Today's drop may simply owe to investors taking money off the table after the quick run-up. Friday's spike came after news broke that longtime CEO Steve Ballmer would be leaving the company within the next 12 months. While investors' initial reaction was positive, a little nervousness may be setting as shareholders realize that while they were no great fans of Ballmer, Microsoft now faces the daunting task of finding a CEO who can step up to the plate and quickly get the company back on track.
Shares of AT&T (NYSE:T
) are also moving lower this morning after Qatar-based broadcaster Al Jazeera filed a lawsuit against the company for pulling the plug on its new U.S. channel. AT&T previously had a deal with Current TV to broadcast the channel, and now that Al Jazeera has purchased Current TV and rebranded the channel, it claims that it was in full compliance with the terms of that agreement and that AT&T had no right to drop the channel from its line-up. Al Jazeera has taken the case to Chancery Judge Sam Glasscock of Delaware, hoping the court will order AT&T either to honor the agreement and broadcast Al Jazeera's channel or pay compensatory damages. AT&T is down 0.8% today.  
Shares of ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
) and Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) are down slightly today as the prices of crude and unleaded gas slip. The more likely cause for the move, however, may be that the lower-than-expected durable-goods orders are making investors grow worried about the big oil companies. Many products we use, both durable and nondurable, are made using petroleum, and many of the larger durable items use large amounts of the resource. While the negative report does not have any serious long-term implications for the companies' futures, it is nonetheless somewhat discouraging.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


