After-hours trading was lively on Thursday, thanks to several big developments that played out following the close of markets.
Confirming media reports that were swirling around on Wednesday, Uber (NYSE:UBER) finally priced its upcoming massive initial public offering (IPO). Chevron (NYSE:CVX) exited from a suddenly competitive takeover battle for Anadarko Petroleum (NYSE:APC), and Zillow (NASDAQ:Z) saw big spikes in post-market volume and price following impressive Q1 results.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Are you reading this digest while cruising home in the Uber you've called? Well, it turns out the ride will be $45.
That's the per-share price of the company's upcoming IPO, anyway. Following the IPO, the shares will hit the New York Stock Exchange for public trading on Friday.
That $45 figure, alas, was near the floor of the $44 to $50 per-share price range Uber had set earlier. The market's harsh initial reaction to Lyft's IPO earlier this year probably had something to do with the pricing. Another factor might be the round of driver strikes convulsing the industry right now.
Nevertheless, no matter which direction it goes in, Uber's stock is going to see a lot of action over the next few days. Perhaps the shares of top rival Lyft will follow suit. Meanwhile, Lyft's shares were up slightly tonight in after-market trading.
Chevron will not be the owner of oil and gas company Anadarko, after all. In the face of a large offer from Occidental Petroleum, the energy giant announced it would not continue pursuing the acquisition.
Last month, Chevron offered a mix of cash and stock amounting to roughly $65 per share at the time for Anadarko. But subsequently, Occidental swooped in with its muscular $76 cash-and-stock bid. Anadarko investors surely hoped for a stock-swelling buyout war, but it didn't happen.
This disappointment seemed faintly evident in post-market trading: Anadarko shares dipped slightly, while those of Chevron and Occidental rose marginally.
In an official press release on its retreat, Chevron quoted its CEO Michael Wirth as saying: "[W]inning in any environment doesn't mean winning at any cost. Cost and capital discipline always matter, and we will not dilute our returns or erode value for our shareholders for the sake of doing a deal."
Will the U.S. real estate market ever cool down? If we go by the just announced Q1 2019 results of online brokerage Zillow, the answer's a resounding no!
For the quarter, the company reaped $454 million in revenue, a whopping 51% improvement over the Q1 2018 figure. On the bottom line, though, the company's net loss deepened to almost $68 million from the year-ago tally of $19 million. Yet on a per-share basis, this was a loss of $0.33, slightly better than the $0.35 loss expected by analysts.
All of Zillow's business units posted higher revenue. It particularly singled out Zillow Offers, a recently introduced efficiency service in which the company buys a domicile directly from a client. It then turns around and sells it, pocketing a fee for the service.
Zillow was a winner in both both volume and price-appreciation terms in after-hours trading. Its share price has risen almost 18% in post-market action as of the time of this writing (6:39 p.m. EDT).



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Stocks took another turn lower on Thursday morning, as new comments from President Trump fed into the idea that trade relations between the U.S. and China aren't nearly as close to a favorable resolution as investors had hoped. As of 11 a.m. EDT, the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI) fell 386 points to 25,581. The S&P 500 (SNPINDEX:^GSPC) dropped 35 points to 2,844, and the Nasdaq Composite (NASDAQINDEX:^IXIC) gave up 123 points to 7,820.
Amid the downdraft, there was still some good news for many individual companies. Chevron (NYSE:CVX) saw its stock rise on reports that it won't get itself into an endless bidding war against Occidental Petroleum (NYSE:OXY) in its efforts to purchase Anadarko Petroleum (NYSE:APC). Meanwhile, Disney (NYSE:DIS) didn't see its shares make a big jump, but its quarterly earnings report revealed a clear pathway toward prosperity in which its new streaming service will play a significant role.
Shares of Chevron climbed more than 2% after the company revealed that it will not go forward with its attempt to acquire Anadarko Petroleum. Chevron said in a press release that it would not exercise its right to make a counterproposal following the rival bid that Occidental Petroleum made.
IMAGE SOURCE: CHEVRON.
Many had believed initially that Chevron would be able to purchase Anadarko without any drama, combining their highly complementary assets in the Permian Basin. However, Occidental not only came in with a rival bid but also one-upped itself with a more cash-rich offer in response to concerns about whether the first attempt was truly a superior proposal. That started a four-day clock for Chevron to make a higher bid.
Chevron CEO Michael Wirth explained the company's rationale in not pursuing a full-blown bidding war. "Winning in any environment doesn't mean winning at any cost," Wirth said, "and we will not dilute our returns or erode value for our shareholders for the sake of doing a deal."
Yet the move comes with a reward any investor could appreciate. If Anadarko terminates its merger deal with Chevron as expected, then it will be on the hook to pay a $1 billion cash termination fee. Chevron said it intends to use that cash to boost its stock repurchase program, bringing anticipated buybacks to $5 billion per year and giving shareholders an even bigger boon. Investors were happy about Chevron's disciplined approach, and the oil major should have opportunities for other asset purchases in the future.
Elsewhere, shares of Disney lost 1%, falling in line with the overall market. The entertainment and media giant reported fiscal second-quarter results that were promising not only in what they said about the recent past but also in what they revealed about the House of Mouse's future plans.
Disney's primary financial metrics were mixed. Revenue climbed about 3% from year-ago levels, which outpaced the expectations of most of those following the stock. Even though adjusted earnings were down double-digit percentages over the same period, the declines weren't as steep as many had feared.
Given the recent success of Avengers: Endgame, it might come as a surprise that the studio entertainment segment saw revenue decline over the past year. Yet it was Disney's theme parks that carried the biggest part of the burden for the company during the quarter, which ended before Endgame's release.
Disney's future looks even brighter. New theme park exhibits are planned for the near future, and the company said that the rollout of the Disney+ streaming service will happen on Nov. 12. Perhaps more importantly, Disney said that it will release Endgame exclusively on Disney+ on Dec. 11 -- giving investors an early look at just how much demand the entertainment giant can garner from its latest hit movie.



Before you consider The Walt Disney Company, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and The Walt Disney Company wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021