These days, it's all about the economy, and for most people, the most important economic indicator is whether they have a job. In that context, today's employment report was disappointing, with only 115,000 new jobs created in April. Although upward revisions to February and March offset part of the shortfall, the weak job market once again raised the question of whether the Federal Reserve would take steps to further stimulate economic activity. Without assurances of more quantitative easing, the Dow Jones Industrials (INDEX: ^DJI) fell more than 1%, with a 135-point drop shortly before 10:45 a.m. EDT. All 30 Dow stocks were down.
Oil took a particularly strong hit, falling all the way down to the $100-per-barrel mark as fears of slower economic activity would presumably create less demand for energy products. Both ExxonMobil (NYSE: XOM) and Chevron (NYSE: CVX) fell between 1% and 2%, as they have depended on high oil prices to help offset the big drop in natural gas. If oil keeps dropping, then even recent dividend increases won't be enough to keep their stocks from declining along with oil prices.
Bank of America (NYSE: BAC) was again the big loser in the Dow, falling more than 3%. Although general economic woes have hammered the bank hard, it's likely that investors bid B of A down in tandem with AIG (NYSE: AIG). The latter was down more than 5% despite an earnings report that featured net income that more than doubled and a strategic turnaround plan that still seems to be on target.
Think about the big picture
If you want powerful stocks for the long run, don't' worry about the Dow's one-day moves. Instead, read The Motley Fool's special report on retirement investing, where you'll find some useful general investing tips as well as three promising stock names that fit well for many investors saving for retirement. Getting access couldn't be easier -- just click here to get your free report today!



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



Whether you're new to investing or have been at it for a lifetime, you need to understand the business models of the companies you invest in. Understanding exactly how a company makes money greatly reduces your overall investing risk.
In that spirit, today we're going to look at three companies with straightforward business models and strong dividends, focusing on companies that have been around awhile and look like they're going to stay around. Because what good is a great dividend if the company's not going to be there to pay it out?
Without further ado, then, here are three big, safe dividend stocks for the beginning investor, along with my personal favorite reasoned out at the end:
1. Coca-Cola (NYSE: KO)
There's no mystery to how Coca-Cola makes money: selling carbonated, brown sugar water and related drinks to a thirsty public. And thankfully, the company has -- except for brief periods -- shied away from trying to diversify. Rival PepsiCo (NYSE: PEP), in contrast, makes a fair chunk of its revenue from its snack food business, which can muddy up the waters at times and leave you less clear on how to look at the company as an investment.
Not Coke. For 125 years, the company has known what it's good at and has brilliantly stuck with it. Let's have a look at some important numbers for this bastion of American capitalism:
Coca-Cola has a five-year average dividend yield of 2.8%, and also just turned in excellent first-quarter results -- with revenue growth of 5.9% year over year, income growth of 7.9% YOY, and worldwide volumes up by 5%. Coca-Cola is also, arguably, the strongest brand name on the planet.
2. Chevron (NYSE: CVX)
Another bastion of American capitalism, Chevron has a business model that's delightfully easy to understand: extract, refine, and sell the fuels that cars, trains, planes, and lawn mowers around the world run on. The company also produces natural gas, a fuel currently experiencing a robust resurgence here in the United States. And the company's been at this straightforward yet profitable game since 1879.
Let's have a look at some important numbers for Chevron:
Chevron's earnings for the first quarter of 2012 were up a healthy 4.2% year over year. The company also declared a $0.90 dividend for the second quarter, $0.09 higher than the first quarter. We always like to see dividends going up.
3. Dow Chemical (NYSE: DOW)
Here's another straightforward business model for you. Dow Chemical manufacturers a range of chemicals that show up in products and economic sectors as far afield as agriculture, pharmaceuticals, rubber, plastics, electronics, and energy. For better or worse, industry has come to rely on chemicals --and Dow has been leading the way since 1897.
Let's have a look at some important numbers for Dow:
At 54%, Dow's dividend payout ratio is right in the pocket and, hence, very sustainable.
The five-year dividend average is 4.6%, a good sign that it likely won't drop below the 3.7% it's at now. On that subject, while revenue and income are down, the company said it will raise its dividend by 28% in the second quarter.
And the winner is...
As thirsty as this world is for both great soda and fossil fuels, my personal favorite of the three selected dividend stocks is Dow. Not only does it have the current best dividend and the very real promise of more, chemicals are such an intricate part of our increasingly industrialized world that it's hard to see this company not doing well far into the future. And anywhere chemicals are used, Dow is there.
And there you have it: three great companies with business models any investor can get their head around, and stocks that offer some of the market's best, most sustainable dividends. If today's column has left you wanting more, check out this free Motley Fool special report: "Secure Your Future With 9 Rock-Solid Dividend Stocks." The title says it all. Get your copy while the stocks are hot by simply clicking here now. 



Before you consider The Coca-Cola Company, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and The Coca-Cola Company wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



