Now more than ever, a comfortable retirement depends on secure, stable investments. Unfortunately, the right stocks for retirement won't just fall into your lap. In this series, I look at 10 measures to show what makes a great retirement-oriented stock.
They say that being No. 2 makes you try harder, and if that's the case, then Chevron (NYSE:CVX) is the hardest-working company in the oil business. With its higher share price, Chevron has a bigger weighting among the Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI) than its larger rival ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), and lately the company has been making every effort to grow even in the face of challenging conditions in the energy markets. Below, we'll revisit how Chevron does on our 10-point scale.
The right stocks for retirees
With decades to go before you need to tap your investments, you can take greater risks, weighing the chance of big losses against the potential for mind-blowing returns. But as retirement approaches, you no longer have the luxury of waiting out a downturn.
Sure, you still want good returns, but you also need to manage your risk and protect yourself against bear markets, which can maul your finances at the worst possible time. The right stocks combine both of these elements in a single investment.
When scrutinizing a stock, retirees should look for:
With those factors in mind, let's take a closer look at Chevron.
Factor
What We Want to See
Actual
Pass or Fail?
Size
Market cap > $10 billion
$227 billion
Pass
Consistency
Revenue growth > 0% in at least four of five past years
3 years
Fail
Free cash flow growth > 0% in at least four of past five years
3 years
Fail
Stock stability
Beta < 0.9
0.78
Pass
Worst loss in past five years no greater than 20%
(18.3%)
Pass
Valuation
Normalized P/E < 18
7.91
Pass
Dividends
Current yield > 2%
3.1%
Pass
Five-year dividend growth > 10%
9.2%
Fail
Streak of dividend increases >= 10 years
25 years
Pass
Payout ratio < 75%
27%
Pass
Total score
7 out of 10
SOURCE: S&P CAPITAL IQ. TOTAL SCORE = NUMBER OF PASSES.
Since we looked at Chevron last year, the company has dropped a point for the second year in a row, with falling revenue leading to the decline. The stock has managed to do a little better, picking up about 5% over the past year.
Chevron has had a rough year, facing the twin headwinds of challenges in maintaining production levels and lower prices for both oil and natural gas. Moreover, with legal issues in Brazil and Ecuador resulting from environmental damage, Chevron has found itself on the defensive in its international operations.
But Chevron is doing its best to grow. It took advantage of Chesapeake Energy's (OTC:CHKA.Q) need to raise cash by spending $3.3 billion to buy nearly all of Chesapeake's assets in the Permian Basin. It's even working closely with ExxonMobil to develop an Australian liquefied-natural-gas project that could supply China and the rest of Asia with gas later this decade.
More recently, Chevron's growth attempts have begun to pay off. In its most recent quarter, the company reported rising production levels both in the U.S. and abroad in net oil-equivalent terms, with international nat-gas production and domestic liquids production leading the way.
For retirees and other conservative investors, it's hard to argue with the rock-bottom valuation that Chevron sports right now. With the company having recently reached the 25-year dividend increase milestone to become a Dividend Aristocrat, Chevron looks more attractive than ever as a core energy stock for retirement portfolios.
Keep searching
Finding exactly the right stock to retire with is a tough task, but it's not impossible. Searching for the best candidates will help improve your investing skills and teach you how to separate the right stocks from the risky ones.

If you're like most Americans, you're a few years (or more) behind on your retirement savings. But a handful of little-known "Social Security secrets" could help ensure a boost in your retirement income. For example: one easy trick could pay you as much as $17,166 more... each year! Once you learn how to maximize your Social Security benefits, we think you could retire confidently with the peace of mind we're all after. Simply click here to discover how to learn more about these strategies.
Add Chevron to My Watchlist, which will aggregate our Foolish analysis on it and all your other stocks.
