Chevron (NYSE: CVX) is expected to report Q2 earnings on July 27. Here's what Wall Street wants to see:
The 10-second takeaway
Comparing the upcoming quarter to the prior-year quarter, average analyst estimates predict Chevron's revenu will drop -9.4% and EPS will shrink 15.1%.
The average estimate for revenue is $60.40 billion. On the bottom line, the average EPS estimate is $3.27.
Revenue details
Last quarter, Chevron notched revenue of $58.90 billion. GAAP reported sales were 1.5% higher than the prior-year quarter's $56.28 billion.
Source: S&P Capital IQ. Quarterly periods. Dollar amounts in millions. Non-GAAP figures may vary to maintain comparability with estimates.
EPS details
Last quarter, non-GAAP EPS came in at $3.17. GAAP EPS of $3.27 for Q1 were 5.8% higher than the prior-year quarter's $3.09 per share.
Source: S&P Capital IQ. Quarterly periods. Non-GAAP figures may vary to maintain comparability with estimates.
Recent performance
For the preceding quarter, gross margin was 30.9%, 130 basis points worse than the prior-year quarter. Operating margin was 18.0%, 170 basis points better than the prior-year quarter. Net margin was 11.3%, 30 basis points better than the prior-year quarter.
Looking ahead
The full year's average estimate for revenue is $255.85 billion. The average EPS estimate is $12.69.
Investor sentiment
The stock has a five-star rating (out of five) at Motley Fool CAPS. Among 994 CAPS All-Star picks (recommendations by the highest-ranked CAPS members), 971 give Chevron a green thumbs-up, and 23 give it a red thumbs-down.
Of Wall Street recommendations tracked by S&P Capital IQ, the average opinion on Chevron is outperform, with an average price target of $125.00.
Can your portfolio provide you with enough income to last through retirement? You'll need more than Chevron. Learn how to maximize your investment income and "Secure Your Future With 9 Rock-Solid Dividend Stocks." Click here for instant access to this free report.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



After a big focus on earnings to start the second-quarter reporting season, the stock market has turned its attention to the increasing struggles in Europe. With the Spanish economy under threat from soaring bond yields and the euro falling against the U.S. dollar, investors moved to what they perceive as less-risky assets, and stock markets around the world sold off sharply. Just before 10:45 a.m. EDT, the Dow Jones Industrials (INDEX: ^DJI) were off 184 points at 12,639.
Every stock in the Dow was down. Microsoft (Nasdaq: MSFT) led the way with a 3% drop. Despite its recent announcement of its Surface tablet and the coming release of Windows 8, the software giant faces a lot of uncertainty about its future direction. With partner Nokia (NYSE: NOK) having had its junk bond rating cut again by Moody's, Microsoft may not be able to rely much on Nokia to help further its attempts to increase its share in the mobile space.
In earnings news, McDonald's (NYSE: MCD) fell 2.5% after its second-quarter profit fell slightly. The fast-food behemoth blamed the strong U.S. dollar for the drop, even as revenue rose a bit and same-store sales jumped 2.7%. If global woes continue, then dollar strength could hit a number of similarly situated multinationals that get a big portion of their revenue from overseas.
Finally, Chevron (NYSE: CVX) fell more than 2% despite announcing a new natural-gas find off the western coast of Australia. With the exploration conveniently located near where Chevron is planning a liquefied natural gas export plant, the find bodes well for the company's strategy to supply hungry energy markets in southeast Asia.
How to fight Europe's woes
Europe is going to be a problem for investors for a while. But we've gotten through past crises, and there's reason to believe we'll get through this one, too. A long-term focus is essential to keep your eye on the ball. Read The Motley Fool's latest special report, where we discuss three stocks for growth and dividend investors alike. The report is absolutely free, so just click here and get your copy today.



Before you consider Microsoft Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Microsoft Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



