The timing of the announcement couldn't have been any unluckier. In early March, before the novel coronavirus outbreak turned into a global pandemic and OPEC opted to keep pumping oil at its previous pace, crude prices were tepid but at least stable. Chevron (NYSE:CVX) had every reason to believe it would be able to fund up to $80 billion worth of dividends the company suggested were in store over the course of the coming five years. Since then, the price of West Texas Intermediate (WTI) oil has fallen by more than $23 per barrel, to roughly $24. The price of Brent crude has slipped to a value of around $33. It's unlikely CEO Michael Wirth saw the world change as it has in just the past three weeks.
To his and the company's credit, Wirth is backing off. Capital spending plans for this year have been reduced by 20% to reflect the fallout from the coronavirus crisis, and Chevron's stock buyback activities have been suspended. Still, he made clear in an interview with CNBC on Tuesday "our dividend is our number one priority and it's very secure."
But, that doesn't necessarily mean the company can afford to pay it.
The oil business is a curious one. Demand for its end products is relatively consistent. But its (perceived) supply can change rapidly when most of what's produced is also immediately consumed, driving big price swings.Exacerbating this volatility is hedging of -- and speculating on -- these price changes.
The cost of extracting oil from the ground is also at least broadly predictable per location, even if not consistent from one drilling project to another.
At $24 per barrel for WTI, though, and $33 for a barrel of Brent, crunching such numbers is almost moot.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.

Pinning down Chevron's exact production cost for a barrel of oil, or its equivalent, can be tough. It's not just a driller. The company also operates downstream businesses like refining and distribution, and it's a chemical company to boot. Both arms help reduce the fiscal volatility of drilling and fracking for oil or gas.
The oil drilling business is also reasonably scalable. Chevron can lower its operational expenses by mothballing operations which cost more to run, and Wirth has already explained the company is going to cut some expenses immediately. That may further pare back the per-barrel cost figure.
Still, upstream production is the company's breadwinner, accounting for nearly 90% of Chevron's 2019 operating earnings, mirroring 2018's results. This is the arm that will be most heavily impacted by the sharp reduction in crude's value, since total operational spending is more closely tethered to upstream operating earnings, production, and oil prices than any other measure.
IMAGE SOURCE: CHEVRON CORPORATION. IMAGE BY AUTHOR.
The math: The company produced 3.08 million barrels of oil or oil-equivalent per day, or roughly 280 million barrels last quarter.That figure divided by right at $6 billion in operating expenses -- excluding administrative costs -- translates into a number right around $21.40 per barrel... a number which, by the way, jibes with previous quarters as well as costs its peers and rivals are facing. Energy consulting and oil intelligence outfit Rystad reckons the breakeven oil for fields already in production is around $26 per barrel. The United States' Energy Information Administration pegged 2018's operating breakeven point at $24 per barrel.While Chevron has generally proven to be above average in terms of cost control, even for the best-managed names oil prices are dancing uncomfortably close with its breakeven prices, which still don't account for items like depreciation, impairments, and expenditures on exploration and well development.
The red flags are waving beyond the most basic of cost concerns too. Chevron's total breakeven point for its upstream business, according to its own calculation made last year, is around $51 per barrel. Separately but similarly, in February's investor presentation the company touted 2018's earnings per barrel of $14.45, but Brent crude's average price in 2018 was a much healthier $71 per barrel.
Its chemical and downstream businesses aren't apt to offset much of any weakness either, as tepid oil prices can also work against pricing power in those arenas.
Simply put, even without knowing the exact specifics, we know enough to know prices are nowhere near the ballpark they need to be to make drilling and production a profitable venture.
For perspective, Rystad believes Occidental Petroleum's production costs amount to less than $30 per barrel. Rystad also estimates ExxonMobil's Permian Basin operations in New Mexico properties are still profitable even when crude is trading at just under $27 per barrel. That bodes well for Chevron, which has particularly focused on its Permian operations in Texas and New Mexico of late, where its operational costs are also unusually low. 
In other words, Chevron's apparent costs aren't out of line with the other major names in the business, and operations that sport a higher-cost profile can clearly be shut down.
The comparison means little given the current circumstances though. Chevron's strong fourth-quarter numbers and the expenditure/dividend plans revealed in early March were based on Q4's average U.S. sales price of $47 per barrel of crude, and $57 per barrel internationally. Prices are roughly half that level now though, and gyrating at values around just the company's likely operational costs per barrel. That leaves no room for error when there was little to begin with. The trailing-12-month payout of $4.76 per share already consumes the bulk of operating earnings. That figure was a reasonably healthy $6.27 per share in 2019, but may not hold anywhere near that figure this year.
Chevron's got $5.7 billion in cash and roughly twice that amount in short-term receivables on its balance sheet to help fund the dividend, for the record, so the dividend may indeed be "safe." That doesn't mean paying it won't take a toll somehow, somewhere if crude's price weakness persists.
The 2015 oil meltdown serves as an example of what can happen when a dividend is arguably over-prioritized. Chevron maintained its dividend in the midst of that nightmare, but long-term debt grew from less than $28 billion at the end of 2014 to $33.6 billion by the end of 2015, while its cash and near-term receivables fell by $5.6 billion. Its cash balance fell again in 2016, and debt grew again as well. Moving into this sort of fiscal scenario makes it trickier to invest in growth once oil prices recover, which in the end has the potential to limit future dividend growth.  
In simplest terms, everything is a trade-off. Your job as an investor is just making sure the trade-offs are worth it for the long haul. This one may not be.
By the way, Occidental and a few other energy names have already decided to cut their dividends as a defensive measure. That's an important hint in itself.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


The current bear market took shape so quickly and dramatically that investors' heads have been left spinning. Before you let fear get the best of you, however, step back and take a deep breath. Dislocations like this can open up investing opportunities, as Wall Street has a bad habit of tossing the baby out with the bathwater. That looks like what's taking place with industry giants Chevron (NYSE:CVX), Realty Income (NYSE:O), and Duke Energy (NYSE:DUK). Here's a primer on why you might love these three high-yield stocks despite the turmoil in the market.
Oil drillers are facing major headwinds today because of low commodity prices. But there's a big difference between a tiny onshore U.S. oil driller with weak finances and a diversified global energy giant like Chevron. In fact, the company just came out and announced plans to cut its capital spending by 20% to preserve its financial strength and protect its dividend. That's par for the course here, noting that Chevron has increased its dividend annually for 32 consecutive years. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
In other words, despite the oil downturn, Chevron's roughly 9% yield looks increasingly secure. Note, too, that the oil giant's financial debt to equity ratio is an industry-leading 0.12 times. Its balance sheet is built to handle the inevitable downturns of the cyclical industry in which it operates. In fact, it had already been working with one of the most conservative investment plans within its peer group before the downturn. So the current pullback on the spending front puts it in an even better position relative to peers to weather the oil industry gale, while continuing to reward investors with a growing dividend over time.
If you can look past the dire headlines today, you will see that oil is still an important global commodity. And giant, diversified, financially conservative Chevron is a good way to play the space for those with a contrarian bent. 
Realty Income is one of the largest real estate investment trusts (REITs) in the net lease space. That means it owns single-tenant properties where the lessee is responsible for most of the costs of the building. It's a fairly low-risk business model, and Realty Income is generally considered one of the best run REITs in the space. That's driven by management's conservative use of leverage, impressive historical portfolio growth, and its long-standing commitment to returning value to shareholders via a growing monthly dividend payment. The shares are usually priced for perfection. However, the economic shutdown caused by COVID-19 has changed that -- Realty's shares have dropped a massive 38% or so in a very short period of time. That's pushed the yield up near its highest levels over the past 10 years.
It wouldn't be fair to say that Realty Income is cheap today, but it does look more reasonably priced than it has in a very long time. And it is hard to complain about a 6% yield that has been increased every year for 27 years.
That said, you need to understand why there's so much pessimism today before you jump aboard this industry bellwether. Roughly 80% of Realty Income's portfolio is tied to the retail sector. With stores across the United States shut down because of the coronavirus, investors are worried that Realty's tenants won't pay their rent. That's probably going to be an issue over the near term, but over the long term, things will eventually bounce back. Which means Realty Income's tenants will again open their doors and pay rent in a timely fashion. Meanwhile, Realty's tenants usually sign long-term leases, which means there's a fair amount of continuity in the portfolio from year to year. A near-term hit from COVID-19 shutdowns isn't likely to derail this REIT's business for long. 

CVX DIVIDEND YIELD DATA BY YCHARTS
If you can look past the fear today, Realty Income is one the largest and best run players in the net lease space. It's worth a deep dive for dividend investors who have shied away from the name because Wall Street has historically awarded it a premium price.
So far we've looked at two companies that are in the center of the Wall Street storm. How about one that's a little less exciting? What's interesting is that, despite Duke Energy's very stable business, its stock has been trashed along with everything else. The shares are down roughly 30% from their highs this year. The yield is a compelling 5.8%. 
Here's what's most interesting about Duke, though: It's an electric and natural gas utility. These are necessity items that people keep paying for even during tough times. And it basically has government-granted monopolies in the markets it serves, so competition isn't really a threat to its business. Moreover, a key piece of that monopoly is that it has to get the rates it charges approved by regulators. While that limits growth potential, it also means the company's pricing dynamics operate outside of the normal economic system. This downturn might hamper demand and earnings in the near term as businesses and consumers pull back, but it shouldn't have much, if any, long-term impact on Duke's monopoly driven business. 
Further, Duke's $56 billion capital spending plan between 2020 and 2024 should continue apace despite what's happening in the market. That, in turn, should keep regulators happy and allow Duke to increase earnings at an annualized rate of 4% to 6% through 2024. Dividends, meanwhile, should inch up roughly in line with earnings growth. Duke is not exciting, but in times like these, boring can be beautiful!
The market downturn has opened up a whole slew of opportunities for investors willing to act while others take shelter. Chevron and Realty Income are both strong, well-run companies dealing with very real storms today. But they are among the best names in their respective industries, and they don't go on sale like this very often. If you can think long-term, you should take a closer look. Duke, meanwhile, is surprisingly boring in comparison, but it too has been hammered by the market's decline. This is likely to be a good opportunity for dividend investors who prefer to play it safe. 



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


