If you've ever felt like getting back to work after a summer weekend was hard, you can sympathize with the stock market. Market pundits are tossing out a piece of trivia: Today marked the seventh consecutive Monday decline for the Dow Jones Industrials (INDEX: ^DJI), something that hasn't happened for a decade. Yet it's hard to put much importance on that streak, as concerns about the global economy seem more relevant for investors. The broader market was also down modestly, while major international markets finished near the unchanged level.
But several Dow stocks overcame the down market and moved higher. Pfizer (NYSE: PFE) led the gainers with a 1.4% advance. The stock may have ridden on the coattails of much smaller Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, whose treatment for a rare disease called TTR-mediate amyloidosis had good results in an early stage trial. Pfizer's Tafamidis, which treats the same drug, got turned down by the FDA last month, but Pfizer may submit more data to support a future approval request.
American Express (NYSE: AXP) rose more than 1% after rivals Visa (NYSE: V) and MasterCard settled a multibillion-dollar dispute with merchants over fees. But because the settlement didn't include as large a fee reduction as some had thought, AmEx should be able to keep its charges at their current level.
Finally, Chevron (NYSE: CVX) rose about three-quarters of a percent on news that any fine the Brazilian government imposes over recent spills off its coast should be no more than $25 million. With some having originally mentioned figures in the billions, the news comes as a relief to nervous Chevron shareholders.
Don't be blue
Down days are always hard, but in the long run, the best stocks prove their mettle. Get yourself thinking long-term by reading the Fool's latest special report, in which you'll find three stocks for growth and dividend investors alike. The report is absolutely free, so get your copy today.



Before you consider Visa Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Visa Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



In the following video, analysts Joel South and Austin Smith continue their discussion to give you both sides of the InterOil story. Parliamentary government in New Guinea is forcing the company to battle through tons of red tape, which cuts into the company's ability to start developing LNG export facilities. InterOil needs to seize the opportunity with extremely profitable Asian-Pacific markets right now, but government delays could allow competitors to sneak in and grab the profit. Joel cautions investors to watch how these government interests play out for the energy stock. 

InterOil is still a risky venture with a lot of upside potential. If InterOil is not of interest or if the company is carries too much risk, then you should check out our new free report, "The Motley Fool's Top Stock for 2012." In it, our chief investment officer identifies his favorite company for the year. To access the report before the rest of the market catches on, click here -- it's absolutely free.




Before you consider Royal Dutch Shell plc, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Royal Dutch Shell plc wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



