In the National Hockey League, the term "dropping the gloves" indicates that fisticuffs are imminent. And since there was a day when the NHL was populated almost exclusively by Canadians, it seems appropriate to observe that Chevron (NYSE: CVX) and its Ecuadorian plaintiffs have dropped the gloves in Canada. Their two-decades-long bout of legal pugilism has now moved north of the border.
During the past wild and woolly week, which ended with the market's Friday plummet, lawyers for residents of an Amazonian rain forest filed a lawsuit against the big oil company in Canada. Their intention is to help themselves to Chevron's assets in Canada to satisfy an $18.2 billion judgment that was slapped on the California company -- which ranks second in size only to ExxonMobil (NYSE: XOM) among U.S.-based fossil fuels producers.
Heading for the assets
Chevron has no assets in Ecuador. In Canada, however, it's an active operator on land and off the country's eastern provinces. It also refines product and cooperates with a host of other companies in producing crude oil from Alberta's tar sands. Approximately 3% of its worldwide production emanates from the land of our northerly neighbor. As a result, the plaintiffs and their attorneys could go a long way toward satisfying their questionable judgment, were they able to gain acquiescence from Canadian courts.
Perhaps the only thing that's completely clear about this bizarre case is that Chevron isn't guilty in the slightest of any sort of pollution in the country that constitutes OPEC's runt. What it did do was to acquire Texaco Petroleum in 2001. Texaco had worked in Ecuador until 1992, nine years before it became even a twinkle in Chevron's eye. Before it ceased its operations and departed the country, Texaco received certification from Ecuadorian government agencies that it had completed all necessary remediation for its share of environmental impacts from its operations in the country.
There's more you should know
Three other significant aspects of the case deserve notation here:
It also turns out that Chevron isn't the only U.S. oil company crying foul in the face of Ecuadorian tactics. A half-dozen years ago, Occidental Petroleum (NYSE: OXY) filed a suit for damages following the country's cancellation of the company's operating contract there. In a skirmish that also lingers on, Ecuadorian authorities claimed that Oxy violated the contract by failing to gain the country's approval before transferring its 40% stake in a project to Canada's Encana Corp. (NYSE: ECA). Like its bigger compatriot, Oxy also maintains that Ecuador violated the U.S.-Ecuador bilateral investment treaty.
Squeezed on either side
It's progressively becoming more apparent, however, that if Chevron didn't stumble onto bad luck in South America, it probably wouldn't have any luck in the region. On the other side of the continent, the company continues to joust with Brazilian authorities over a pair of relatively small oil spills from its Frade field operation in the Campos basin. Indeed, the second -- and tinier -- of the spills may have resulted from natural seepage, rather than from the effects of drilling operations.
Nonetheless, Brazilian authorities have grabbed a big stick, including levying criminal charges against a dozen Chevron employees in Brazil. That's occurred despite Brazil's state-run Petrobras (NYSE: PBR) having "skated" in the face of a trio of more sizable spills in the past several months.
Regarding Ecuador, however, I continue to scratch my noggin regarding a few significant, but unanswered, questions relating to the lingering Chevron contretemps:
The Foolish bottom line
Ideally these questions will be answered before another pair of decades has passed. In the meantime, you may have a question about the attractiveness of Chevron as an investment in the face of sliding oil prices and its disputes in South America. My response: The company is solid, with quality management and sound operations globally. Further, while Exxon's shares have declined by just over 10% since mid-March, Chevron's have fallen by nearly 14%. As such, Chevron now trades at a 7.2 times forward P/E ratio, versus 8.8 times for Exxon
With all that in mind, along with my admittedly unlawyerly contention that the dual imbroglios discussed above will ultimately prove frivolous, I'm inclined to urge Fools to place Chevron on their individual versions of My Watchlist.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



The following video is part of our "Motley Fool Conversations" series, in which Fool contributor and personal finance analyst Dan Caplinger discusses topics around the investing world.
In today's edition, Dan looks at Chevron (NYSE: CVX) in the latest installment of a Motley Fool series in which we look at how each Dow Jones (INDEX: ^DJI) stock affects the world-renowned blue chip average. There are some idiosyncrasies in how the Dow Jones is calculated, and Dan explains how Chevron ends up having a bigger impact on the average than its fellow energy rival in the Dow. He also looks at why the Dow only has two energy stocks and considers some of the other energy powerhouses that might get an invitation to the Dow at some point.
The energy industry has a lot of potential, and we've got one energy stock idea that could knock your socks off. Read about it right here in The Motley Fool's special free report on the energy industry and its best prospects. It's free, but only available for a limited time, so click here today.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



