The recent stock slump continues with steep downturns hitting all three major U.S. indices as of midafternoon Thursday. The Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI
)was down more than 203 points as of 2:30 p.m. EDT, retreating further from the record highs it flirted with just last week; all but three of the index's blue-chip member stocks have tumbled today. JPMorgan Chase (NYSE:JPM
) has fallen to the bottom of the Dow ahead of its earnings report tomorrow, while fellow index member Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) is also on the downswing. Let's catch up on what you need to know.
China can't break loose
SOURCE: WIKIMEDIA COMMONS
China kick-started the big market slump this morning with disappointing trade data. Exports from the world's second-largest economy plunged by 6.6% in March, light years away from the 4.9% gain that economists had forecast. Meanwhile, the country's imports also dove more than 11% for the month. While China did post a trade surplus for March to bounce back from February's trade deficit, economists aren't too convinced the closely watched emerging market is headed for clear sailing just yet. While exports did fall more in February, China is reliant on trade to keep its growing economy moving forward at full steam. Some analysts have even lowered growth projections for the economy to 7.4% in 2014, just below Beijing's 7.5% growth target.
JPMorgan's stock has fallen by 2.7% today as the hours count down to its Friday earnings report. Analysts on average expect earnings per share of $1.40 for the quarter, a drop of more than 10% year over year. It's been rough going for JPMorgan and its shareholders as of late, with CEO Jamie Dimon on Wednesday noting that the bank "was under constant and intense pressure" last year.
Legal woes have taken a big bite out of the company's earnings, and moving past those hurdles should help JPMorgan in the future. The company dealt with more than $20 billion in legal charges in 2013, and investors should expect a rebound from that unsettling trend this year. The company is focused on its core, best-performing businesses, and now it's up to tomorrow's data to see if JPMorgan can bounce back from 2013.
Meanwhile, Chevron's stock has fallen 1.0% to rank among the Dow's biggest losers as of midafternoon. The company made news today when it announced it will invest $1.6 billion into drilling in Argentina, signing the deal with the country's state-run enterprise YPF. The move comes after rival ExxonMobil announced a decline in capital spending, as companies across Big Oil deal with sluggish financial results in recent times. Chevron is projecting earnings to fall for the first quarter from the previous quarter, but keep an eye on whether the company follows up its Argentina investment with more projects to boost production in the near future.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Thursday morning, the Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI
) took a breather from the previous day's big gain, falling about 27 points as of 11 a.m. EDT as the broader market also declined modestly. Investors remain pleased with the state of the U.S. economy, especially after minutes from the Federal Reserve's last policy meeting suggested that interest rates would rise only gradually over the next few years. But with tensions rising once again in Ukraine, and with global economic conditions less favorable than those in the U.S., investors aren't willing to get too excited about the Dow Jones Industrials' prospects. The tug-of-war showed itself among the index's components today, as AT&T (NYSE:T
) bounced back from recent declines even as Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) fell after issuing a warning on its first-quarter results.
AT&T rose 1.4% as the wireless network giant indicated that it will expand the geographical reach of its ultra-high-speed Internet service. AT&T's gigabit U-verse service will now be available in key locations in North Carolina's Research Triangle region, showing the company's emphasis on high-technology areas with big demand for the fastest-speed connections available. The Research Triangle will be AT&T's second area with the service, after Austin, Texas. With AT&T vying with Silicon Valley to offer the highest-speed Internet to high-end customers, it's clear that the telecom stalwart and Dow Jones Industrials component will rely more on broadband, wireless, and other cutting-edge technologies to boost its growth, and investors like that direction.
Meanwhile, Chevron fell 1.5% after giving an interim update for its first quarter. Chevron said that profit would come in below its fourth-quarter level, citing lower oil and gas production volumes in weather-affected areas of North America, as well as Kazakhstan. Adverse currency moves and one-time asset writedown charges will also hit earnings, although taking away their impact, Chevron expects sequential earnings to be relatively flat. But with production drops of 2% internationally and more than 4% domestically in the first two months of 2014, Chevron is clearly struggling to maintain its upstream volume; downstream operations also fell due to maintenance at several refineries.
Looking forward, the Dow Jones Industrials will continue to get buffeted on all sides, especially as earnings season ramps up. Chevron and AT&T and their moves today show just how important it is to look at individual stocks and their specific prospects in assessing the health of the blue-chip index and the broader market.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


