It has certainly been a year of milestones for the iconic Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI
) which has recovered from its March 2009 deep recession lows in the 6,500 range to hit multiple new all-time highs this year, topping 16,000 as of Friday's close.
This whirlwind rally has been precipitated by generally positive economic data across the board. U.S. GDP growth of 3.6% for the third-quarter demonstrates a stronger growth rate than we've seen all year and signals, at least to some extent, that the Federal Reserve's monetary easing policies are encouraging borrowing on a consumer and enterprise level. The jobs picture would also coincide with this theory, as the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported on Friday that the unemployment rate dipped to a fresh five-year low at 7% as 203,000 nonfarm payroll jobs were created in November. With the exception of a few data points, this rally has all the catalysts needed to continue.
Something else this rally has is skeptics. As Fool Morgan Housel noted recently, it's perhaps one of the most hated rallies of all time. I can definitely be lumped in with skeptics at times because I've noticed a pattern of increased stock buybacks and cost-cutting which are driving profits higher rather than traditional sales growth which is what Wall Street would prefer to see.
Despite this group of dissenters, there exists a select group of Dow components known as its "most loved" that short-sellers wouldn't dare bet against. That's why today, as we do every month, I'm going to suggest we take a deeper dive into these five loved Dow stocks. Why, you wonder? Because these companies offer insight as to what to look for in a steady business so we can apply that knowledge to future stock research and hopefully locate similar businesses.
Here are the Dow's five most loved stocks:
Company
Short Interest As a % of Outstanding Shares
Boeing (NYSE:BA
)
0.79%
General Electric (NYSE:GE
)
0.82%
United Technologies (NYSE:RTX
)
0.83%
Procter & Gamble
0.84%
Chevron (NYSE:CVX
)
0.86%
SOURCE: S&P CAPITAL IQ.
SOURCE: DAVE SIZER, WIKIMEDIA COMMONS.
Boeing
Why are short-sellers avoiding Boeing?
Do investors have a reason to worry?
General Electric
Why are short-sellers avoiding General Electric?
Do investors have a reason to worry?
United Technologies
Why are short-sellers avoiding United Technologies?
Do investors have a reason to worry?
Procter & Gamble
Why are short-sellers avoiding Procter & Gamble?
Do investors have a reason to worry?
Chevron
Why are short-sellers avoiding Chevron?
Do investors have a reason to worry?




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


