Editor's Note: A previous version of this article misstated KiOR's end of year cash balance. KiOR closed out 2013 with $25 million in cash.  

EVERYONE LOVES WHEN A PLAN COMES TOGETHER. SOMEONE FORGOT TO TELL THAT TO COLUMBUS. IMAGE SOURCE: KIOR.
After receiving certification from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for its drop-in cellulosic gasoline and cellulosic diesel in 2012, next-generation fuels producer KiOR (NASDAQ: KIOR) began 2013 with grandiose expectations for its first commercial-scale production facility in Columbus, Miss. At nameplate capacity the $213 million biorefinery would consume 500 bone dry tons of wood chips per day, churn out 13 million gallons of product per year, and sell to well-funded customers such as FedEx and Catchlight Energy, a joint venture between Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) and Weyerhaeuser (NYSE:WY
).
It's a solidly profitable idea on paper: Take low-cost feedstocks such as pine pulp from low-margin industries such as paper manufacturing and cheaply covert them into drop-in fuels and heating oils. It has yet to be proved viable in real life, however. Last year was full of disappointments and setbacks, although no one said ramping a new technology platform for the first time was supposed to be easy.
Things didn't get any rosier for investors during a 35-minute operational update from management on Thursday morning, which dropped shares nearly 6%. While yet another plan for achieving economic operations was described to investors, outsiders also learned of multiple developments with scary implications. The news comes a few weeks after Condoleezza Rice (yes, that Condoleezza Rice) resigned from the Board of Directors, although there was no disagreement with the company. Will the company be able to right the ship in 2014, or should investors lower the life boat and row away as fast as they can?
Production update for 2013
Management opened the conference call by immediately crushing investor hopes for any good news. Despite announcing that Columbus would notch fourth-quarter production of 410,000 gallons as recently as Dec. 23, management admitted the number was actually 385,000 gallons. Why the estimates are 25,000 gallons apart is quite a head-scratcher, especially considering that the biorefinery has been idle since Dec. 17. Don't be quick to ignore the discrepancy, either: There are several more I'll bring to your attention.
For the full year, Columbus produced just 894,000 gallons of products and shipped 597,000 gallons (252,000 gallons in the fourth quarter). That's a far cry from initial production guidance released in November 2012. Of course, over-promising is nothing new for KiOR.
Date
Guidance
Period
Actual
Nov. 8, 2012
500,000 to 1 million gallons of blendstock sales
Q4 2012
33,724 gallons of blendstock sold
March 18, 2013
3 million to 5 million gallons of production
2013
894,000 gallons produced
May 9, 2013
300,000 to 500,000 gallons of production
Q2 2013
133,000 gallons produced
Nov. 7, 2013
>1 million gallons of production
2013
894,000 gallons produced
Dec. 23, 2013
920,000 gallons of production
2013
894,000 gallons produced
SOURCES: SEC FILINGS, KIOR PRESS RELEASES.
Believe me, I want the technology to work, produce tens or hundreds of millions of gallons of drop-in fuels each year, and bring back hope for shuttered paper mills around the country. My major in college was closely related to my university's paper engineering program, so I witnessed firsthand plant closings, job losses, and a scrambling within the industry to find higher margin products. Unfortunately, investors have to value the technology's performance to date at face value and, at this point, question the competence of management.
Aside from continuing to overestimate the performance at Columbus, management announced plans to build a second production facility (named Columbus II) in addition to following through with a planned facility in Natchez, Miss. It sounds like a good long-term plan at first -- and it may work out -- but the facilities will cost a combined $825 million to build in addition to increased capital expenditures associated with its original Columbus biorefinery this year. 
Financial obstacles remain
I don't know if 2014 will be any different for KiOR, but I do know that not providing production guidance for the year is perhaps the smartest move management has made to date. The latest plan calls for Columbus to be idled in the first quarter to install additional equipment and test operational improvements, which will increase process throughput, yield, and efficiency. If all goes according to plan (sound familiar?), the biorefinery will ramp from just 300 bone dry tons per day of biomass and conversion rates of 30 gallons per bone dry tons to nameplate capacity of 500 bone dry tons per day and 72 gallons per bone dry tons by the end of this year.
The upgrades will require an additional $10 million, while research and development goals will require $22 million for 2014. That poses an obvious problem. While idling Columbus will slash expenses, a history of operational setbacks coupled with uncertainty regarding the EPA's proposed renewable volume obligations for 2014 is enough to make any would-be investor think twice. Not surprisingly, the company remains in a pinch in its search for future financing. 
Even larger, better financed partners such as Chevron and Weyerhaeuser appear to be keeping their distance. That's at least a little surprising, considering the cost advantages KiOR's platform could provide to Chevron's refining business, although the company may be hedging its bets now that biofuel volumes are being reduced. Similarly, Weyerhaeuser could secure an additional market for its pulping business -- or waste products in general -- by building a close relationship with KiOR for future facilities. The hesitance of larger partners and customers to finance operational improvement projects should make you think twice about parking your money in the company's stock, too.
Foolish bottom line
Can KiOR ever demonstrate the economics of its thermocatalytic process to investors? The company and its shareholders will probably learn the answer in 2014. Successful implementation of key operational improvements would allow the company to attract critical financing for operations and two additional commercial scale facilities with a total nameplate capacity of 53 million gallons per year. Failing to make the necessary process upgrades would likely jeopardize the existence of the company. For now, investors should stick on the sidelines until significant financial and operational improvements are achieved. The technological hurdles currently facing KiOR, as well as the resistance of partners such as Chevron and Weyerhaeuser to provide funding, present too much risk to justify an investment. Execution questions swirling around management shouldn't be overlooked, either. My advice: Don't get cute. There are plenty of other investment ideas out there.


Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Dividend stocks outperform non-dividend-paying stocks over the long run. It happens in good markets and bad, and the benefit of dividends can be quite striking -- dividend payments have made up about 40% of the market's average annual return from 1936 to the present day.
But few of us can invest in every single dividend-paying stock on the market, and even if we could, we're likely to find better gains by being selective. Today, two of the world's largest oil and gas companies will square off in a head-to-head battle to determine which offers a better dividend for your portfolio.
Tale of the tape
Founded in 1911, Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) is America's second-largest integrated oil and gas producer, and is also ranked among the top 10 companies on the Fortune Global 500 list. It has been a component of the Dow Jones Industrial Average since 2008. Chevron operates more than 22,000 service stations across six continents, including 8,060 gas stations in the U.S. alone. Chevron completed the acquisitions of Texaco and Unocal in the aughts, which significantly beefed up its crude oil and natural gas assets around the world. Chevron boasts recoverable resources of 11.3 billion barrels of oil equivalent and a daily production capacity of 2.6 million BOE, but it also owns interests in 11 power-generation facilities with a total operating capacity of around 2,200 megawatts.
Founded in 1909, BP (NYSE:BP
), previously British Petroleum, is one of the six global oil and gas supermajors, a distinction that also includes Chevron. The British company is actually the largest oil and gas producer in the United States and also operates 15 refineries with a total processing capacity of approximately 2 million BOE per day. Headquartered in London, BP controls more than 20,000 BP Connect gas stations in more than 80 countries around the world. During the late 1990s, the company merged with Amoco, and it subsequently acquired ARCO and Burmah Castrol in 2000 to bolster its leadership position in American oil and gas markets. However, the 2010 Deepwater Horizon oil spill has already forced BP to pay more than $20 billion in related damages, which has dented its prospects with investors somewhat.
Statistic
Chevron
BP
Market cap
$240.8 billion
$151.6 billion
P/E ratio
10.2
6.3
Trailing 12-month profit margin
10.2%
6.1%
TTM free cash flow margin*
0.2%
(0.7%)
Five-year total return 
99.1%
28.2%
SOURCE: MORNINGSTAR AND YCHARTS.
*FREE CASH FLOW MARGIN IS FREE CASH FLOW DIVIDED BY REVENUE FOR THE TRAILING 12 MONTHS.
Round one: endurance (dividend-paying streak)
According to Dividata, BP began paying half-yearly dividends to American shareholders in 1987, but it switched to quarterly distributions two years later. BP's 27-year long dividend-paying streak can't hold a candle to Chevron, which has been paying dividends since the legendary 1911 Standard Oil antitrust decision split it off as an independent company.
Winner: Chevron, 1-0.
Round two: stability (dividend-raising streak)
BP kept its dividend payouts steady between 2009 and 2010 after the global financial crisis, and then made substantial reductions to distributions as a result of Deepwater Horizon. Thus, BP's dividend-raising streak only begins in 2012. That makes this an easy win for Chevron, which has been increasing dividends at least once every year since 1987, according to the DRIP Investing Resource Center.
Winner: Chevron, 2-0.
Round three: power (dividend yield)
Some dividends are enticing, but others are merely tokens that barely affect an investor's decision. Have our two companies sustained strong yields over time? Let's look:

CVX DIVIDEND YIELD (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS
Winner: BP, 1-2.
Round four: strength (recent dividend growth)
A stock's yield can stay high without much effort if its share price doesn't budge, so let's look at the growth in payouts over the past five years.

CVX DIVIDEND DATA BY YCHARTS
Winner: Chevron, 3-1.
Round five: flexibility (free cash flow payout ratio)
A company that pays out too much of its free cash flow in dividends could be at risk of a cutback, particularly if business weakens. We want to see sustainable payouts, so lower is better:

CVX CASH DIVIDEND PAYOUT RATIO (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS
Winner: Tie.
Bonus round: opportunities and threats
Chevron wins the best-of-five on the basis of its history, but investors should never base their decisions on past performance alone. Tomorrow might bring a far different business environment, so it's important to also examine each company's potential, whether it happens to be nearly boundless or constrained too tightly for growth.
Chevron opportunities
BP opportunities
Chevron threats
BP threats
One dividend to rule them all
In this writer's humble opinion, it seems that Chevron has a better shot at long-term outperformance, thanks to a substantial amount of producing assets in promising regions, and a far lower legal overhang than its peer. Furthermore, an improvement in WTI crude oil prices, and a widening spread between domestic and international oil prices, could also boost margins -- for both companies. BP has been making big moves in the Gulf of Mexico with the possibility of a large amount of recoverable oil reserves, but the Deepwater Horizon continues to plague BP's profitability and its reputation. You might disagree, and if so, you're encouraged to share your viewpoint in the comments below. No dividend is completely perfect, but some are bound to produce better results than others. Keep your eyes open -- you never know where you might find the next great dividend stock!


Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


