The U.S. economy burned through an average of 20.46 million barrels of crude oil and related liquids each day last year, according to BP's (NYSE:BP) latest annual Statistical Review of World Energy. That was about 500,000 barrels per day (BPD), or 2.5%, more than 2017's total, and the largest demand increase in more than a decade. Overall, America accounted for 20.5% of the world's oil and related liquid consumption last year. (That includes liquid derivatives of coal and natural gas, as well as biodiesel and biogasoline products such as ethanol.) 
What was interesting, though, is that the amount of oil the U.S. used to make fuels like gasoline fell last year. Here's a look at what actually drove demand growth.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
BP breaks oil demand into four categories:
BP's report found that one of America's significant drivers of oil demand was in middle distillates; consumption rose by 3.8% to nearly 6 million BPD. That was due in part to strong economic growth, which drove demand for diesel to fuel 18-wheelers and other commercial vehicles. In addition, America is exporting increasing qualities of diesel and jet fuel to global markets where prices are higher.
BP's report also showed that demand in the "other" category grew at an even stronger 7.2% pace to 4.6 million BPD. That was due mainly to the completion of new petrochemical complexes domestically. CP Chem, a joint venture between refiner Phillips 66 (NYSE:PSX) and oil giant Chevron (NYSE:CVX), was one of several companies that finished U.S. petrochemical expansion projects in early 2018. Phillips 66 and Chevron invested $6 billion into three facilities, one of which will crack ethane to produce 1.5 million metric tons of ethylene a year. Ethylene is the most common building block for plastics, which is what the other two CP facilities will convert it into.
While American refineries and petrochemical plants processed more oil and liquids to make diesel and petrochemicals, they refined less of it into products like gasoline and fuel oil. According to BP, oil used to make light distillates fell by 0.1% last year. That was due in large part to the increasing fuel efficiency of new vehicles. Meanwhile, the amount of oil used to make fuel oils fell by 5.9% due to warmer winter temperatures across the U.S., as well as the ongoing shift toward heating homes with cleaner-burning natural gas.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
One of the key findings of BP's report is the growing demand for oil and liquids by petrochemical plants. BP's chief economist Dale Spencer stated that "the increased importance of petrochemicals in driving oil demand growth was also evident in the global production breakdown, with products most closely related to petrochemicals accounting for around half of the overall growth in demand."
America is a key driver of the rising demand for these liquids due to the recent completion of several petrochemical plants along the U.S. Gulf Coast -- and more such facilities are on the way. ExxonMobil, for example, recently approved the construction of a $2 billion expansion of its chemical plant in Baytown, Texas. Meanwhile, Phillips 66 and Chevron are considering investing between $5 billion and $6 billion on another new U.S. petrochemical expansion project that would turn ethane into ethylene.
In addition to consuming NGLs domestically, American companies are exporting increasing volumes of not only these liquids but their end products. Midstream companies such as Energy Transfer (NYSE:ET) and Enterprise Products Partners (NYSE:EPD) are building new facilities for the purpose. Last spring, Energy Transfer partnered with China's Satellite Petrochemical to construct a new ethane export facility along the U.S. Gulf Coast. It expects to compete the Orbit export terminal by the end of next year, which will enable it to ship 150,000 barrels of ethane per day to Satellite's facilities in China. Meanwhile, Enterprise Products Partners is expanding its world-leading LPG export capacity, and is also building a facility to export ethylene. As these facilities enter service, they'll drive further demand growth.
While America's demand for oil and related liquids reached new heights last year, it's not because we're consuming more gasoline. Instead, our rising appetite was mainly due to the completion of several new petrochemical plants that turn liquids like NGLs into the building blocks of plastics. With the second wave of petrochemical plants coming, and more export capacity under construction, U.S. demand should continue rising.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Chevron (NYSE:CVX) was outbid by Occidental Petroleum in the Andadarko Petroleum acquisition fight. It was something of a stunner to see the oil giant lose out to a company that's around a fifth of its size. If Chevron had won, it would have expanded its reach in the hot onshore U.S. energy market. Is Chevron worth owning without that? Here's what you need to know to decide.
The first and perhaps most important thing to understand about the Anadarko acquisition attempt is that Chevron didn't actually need to ink a deal. It was trying to buy a strong asset in a market that's been out of favor for some time. To put a number on that, even after the boost from the merger, Anadarko's shares are still roughly 40% below their 2014 peak. It was an opportunistic move.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
The second big takeaway here is that Chevron chose not to get into a protracted bidding war. Yes, it lost out on Anadarko, but management was clearly unwilling to overpay for the asset. That shows discipline, and investors should be quite comforted that egos didn't trump financial common sense. 
In the end, losing out on Anadarko may have looked bad in the headlines, but it wasn't a huge loss for Chevron. It still has a strong growth profile, rock-solid finances, and the scale and reach to reward investors in good times and bad. Here's a quick breakdown on those positives.
In the first quarter of 2019, Chevron's production was up 7% year over year. That increase was driven by the Wheatstone LNG facility in Australia and continued strength in the onshore U.S. space. That U.S. onshore, meanwhile, has not only been a strong contributor to performance, but it has been doing even better than originally expected. 
Here's the thing, the first quarter's production growth isn't a one-off event. Chevron has plans to spend around $20 billion a year through 2023 to grow its business. It expects that money to generate a solid 3% to 4% compound annual production growth rate. Some quarters and years will be better than others, of course, but the overall trend is still solidly heading higher. 
Meanwhile, Chevron has one of the best balance sheets in the industry. Long-term debt makes up a modest 15% or so of the oil giant's capital structure. It has more than enough financial flexibility to support its business even if oil prices should slump again. It should also have more than ample resources to support its dividend in such an event, noting that it didn't cut its dividend during the deep oil downturn that started in mid-2014. In fact, it has paid higher dividends each year for an incredible 32 years and counting. The only way to reach a number like that is to run a great business, noting that the oil industry has a history of being volatile.   
This brings up another important aspect of Chevron's operations: diversification. Although Chevron may be more tilted toward upstream (oil and gas drilling) than some of its peers, its business spans the upstream, midstream (pipelines), and downstream (chemicals and refining) sectors. When the upstream operation is struggling, the downstream is often benefiting from lower input costs since oil and gas are key feedstocks. Midstream tends to be pretty consistent in good years and bad for commodity prices. The overall result is a more stable business.

CVX DIVIDEND YIELD (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS.
Chevron is very well positioned today. Add in a generous 4% dividend yield, and the oil giant starts to look pretty enticing -- especially for income investors. It's also worth noting that the yield is toward the high end of the company's yield range since the turn of the century, suggesting now is at least a decent time to be looking at Chevron.
Chevron is a financially strong oil giant putting up solid operating results. It expects to keep doing so for years to come, too. Yes, it lost out on Anadarko, but that's simply evidence of a disciplined management team and doesn't change the upward trajectory Chevron's business is on today. Although you have to believe that oil and natural gas will remain key sources of energy if you buy Chevron, the loss in the Anadarko contest shouldn't dissuade you, here. Chevron is definitely worth buying, particularly for conservative income investors.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


