Whether you're new to investing or have been at it for a lifetime, you need to understand the business models of the companies you invest in, because understanding how a company makes money will significantly reduce your overall investing risk.
In that spirit, today we'll look at three companies with straightforward business models, strong dividends, and a knack for longevity. Because what good is a great dividend if the company's not going to be around long enough to pay it out?
1. France Telecom-Orange (NYSE:ORAN
)
France T is the French version of America's old Ma Bell, offering land-line telephone service, mobile-phone service, Internet service, VoIP, and cable TV to more than 223 million customers. It operates in 33 countries, including France, Spain, Poland, and the U.K., under the France T and Orange brands, and delivers essential communications services. As such, like Ma Bell did in its day, France T lives in the space somewhere between a telecom company and a utility. A good space to be in, from an investor standpoint.
France T's five-year average dividend yield is 5.9%. I'd like to see that higher; it would make me more confident that the current 12% is going to hang around for a while. But I do like that, in addition to its bustling-but-basic consumer business, it also provides platform services, like customer relationship management, messaging, hosting, cloud computing, and security solutions. France T does it all.
2. Mine Safety Appliances (NYSE:MSA
)
Mine Safety has been around since 1914, and is the undisputed world leader in the development and manufacture of mine-safety gear: hard hats, helmets, respirators, you name it. It's a simple business model, but one executed with near perfection by MSA, and one that's in no danger of going away: Coal still powers 50% of America's electrical grid.
MSA has a five-year average dividend yield of 3.1%, which argues for a potentially higher dividend in quarters to come. James Early, The Motley Fool's lead advisor on Income Investor, loves the fact that the company's top five managers have each been with the company for 29 years or more, and that insiders own more than 22% of its stock. So do I. 
3. Chevron (NYSE:CVX
)
For those violently and intrinsically opposed to big oil, avert your gaze and skip to the bottom of the article. But for those who recognize it as a necessity, for the time being at least, please continue reading. Chevron is the country's second-largest oil company, with daily production of 2.8 million barrels of oil per day. And for what it's worth, for the socially conscious-minded out there (like myself), Chevron recognizes that climate change is real (something even many of the country's leading politicians deny) and has a set of guiding principles in place to begin addressing it from its end. 
Chevron's five-year average dividend yield of 3.1% argues fairly well for the continuation of the current 3.6%. The company also hasn't missed a dividend payment going back at least as far as 1997, and has raised it from $0.54 per share to $0.90 per share in that space of time. We like that kind of track record around here.
Vive la France!
Am I about to be uninterestingly obvious? Probably, but that 12% dividend France T is currently offering is just too juicy to pass up. With its vast customer base and vast array of services on offer, as well as a reasonable enough payout ratio, France T is hard to go wrong with right now, in my opinion. Ma Bell, being essentially a monopoly in its time, would have been hard to pass up as an investment, too.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


The following video is from Monday's MarketFoolery podcast, featuring host Chris Hill and analysts Jason Moser and Michael Olsen, CFA. This segment's focus is on reports that BP (NYSE:BP
)has sold its 50% stake in TNK-BP, a joint venture in Russia, for $17 billion in cash. The guys discuss why BP would have made this deal, looking at the company's many recent struggles.
Jason goes on to share why, in the universe of big dividend-paying energy stocks, he stands by Halliburton(NYSE:HAL
) as top pick. Watch the following video to hear his reasoning and listen in on the guys' full conversation. You're also invited to check out The Motley Fool's free premium report "3 Stocks for $100 Oil." If you're on the lookout for some currently intriguing energy plays, then this is a must-read -- click here now to claim your free copy.



Before you consider BP p.l.c., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and BP p.l.c. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



