Transocean (NYSE:RIG
) announced yesterday that it has inked a five-year contract deal with Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) valued at $1.1 billion. Transocean will be supplying the energy company with a state-of-the-art newbuild ultra-deepwater drillship, the latest addition to the company's fleet of 79 rigs.
Equipment this size takes time to build, and shipyard delivery isn't expected until Q1 2016, with the contract commencing in Q4 2016. Transocean expects capital investment to clock in at around $725 million, excluding capitalized interest.
"We are delighted to continue our partnership with Chevron in pioneering ultra-deepwater drillships that in the past have set world records and achieved strong utilization with time-saving efficiencies," said Steven L. Newman, president and chief executive officer of Transocean Ltd., in a statement. "Further, the addition of this latest newbuild drillship demonstrates the execution of our asset strategy and commitment to increasing our exposure to high-specification floaters with industry-leading capabilities."
Construction on this latest project will start in Q4 2013 in Okpo, South Korea, where Transocean has already churned out five Enhanced Enterprise-Class rigs and where six other ultra-deepwater rigs are currently being built.




Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



Although we don't believe in timing the market or panicking over daily movements, we do like to keep an eye on market changes -- just in case they're material to our investing thesis.
Markets and oil prices are up around the world as a deal has emerged in the Senate to end the government shutdown and extend the debt ceiling until early 2014. As of 1:30 p.m. EDT, the Dow Jones Industrial Average (INDEX: ^DJI) is up 192 points to 15,360, while the S&P 500 (SNPINDEX:^GSPC
) is up 21 points to 1,719.
Senate leaders have agreed on a plan that would extend the debt ceiling until Feb. 7 and fund the government through Jan. 15. The agreement also sets a Dec. 13 deadline for a budget plan. The only concession House Republicans appear to have won from the debt ceiling ordeal is an income verification for those who get subsidies to buy health insurance on the Obamacare exchanges.
The bill must now be voted on and passed in both the Senate and House of Representatives, then signed by President Obama. While markets are up on news of the deal, this really just kicks the budget can three months down the road, setting up another showdown just after the holiday season.
A look at oil
The oil and gas market doesn't seem to care that this is just a temporary deal. In the U.S., WTI crude is up 1.15% to $102.37, and natural gas is up 0.87% to $3.82. Internationally, Brent Crude is up 0.75%, to $110.79.
Dow oil giants Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) and ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
) are lagging the market's 1.2% rise today, as oil prices are up less than the overall market.
It has now been 15 days since the government shutdown started. While we won't know for some time what effect the shutdown has had on the economy, economists' estimates call for a hit to GDP growth of between 0.1 to 0.15 percentage points of GDP per week. Oil prices are highly sensitive to economic growth, and the slowdown in the U.S. has led to reduced U.S. oil use and a widening of the WTI-Brent crude spread.
The large determinants of oil prices going forward will continue to be political stability in oil-producing nations, economic growth around the world -- particularly the U.S. and China -- and the continuation or lifting of economic sanctions on Iran.
So long as Congress doesn't let the U.S. default on its debt, the biggest news in oil markets for the rest of the week should come tomorrow evening when we get data on economic growth in China.




Before you consider the S&P 500 Index - Price Return (USD), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the S&P 500 Index - Price Return (USD) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Although we don't believe in timing the market or panicking over daily movements, we do like to keep an eye on market changes -- just in case they're material to our investing thesis.
The Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI
) is up 200 points as of 12:15 EDT. In most months, that move might well have reflected continued low inflation and its positive impact on the U.S. economy. But today's scheduled release of the Consumer Price Index didn't happen, as the Bureau of Labor Statistics is subject to the government shutdown. Nevertheless, using readings from other countries and more anecdotal evidence here in the U.S., we can draw our own conclusions about inflation -- and doing so points to favorable conditions for the Dow but potentially unfavorable ones for ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
) and Chevron (NYSE:CVX
).
Eurostat announced this morning that inflation in the Euro area fell to just 1.1% on an annual basis -- less than half its rate of a year ago. Prices have come down substantially in most of the indexes that Eurostat tracks, including core readings that exclude volatile food and energy prices. In particular, energy costs haven't been an issue, with year-over-year price declines of 0.9% comparing with a huge 9.1% annual rate this time last year.
In the U.S., we've seen the same impact. Figures from AAA show that retail gas prices are at their lowest levels of the year, having dropped $0.19 per gallon in September alone. Further decreases are expected, and prices in isolated areas have fallen below the $3-per-gallon mark.
Why inflation matters
Obviously, lower energy costs have a direct impact on revenue and profit for Exxon and Chevron. Exxon has struggled to keep its production levels up, and relatively high prices for oil and refined products have helped it offset sluggish production growth even as the company strives to find new sources of energy reserves to replace played-out wells. Chevron has had better success in growing its production, but doing so remains a constant battle for the oil giant, as it also faces the huge risks of environmental liability inherent in oil and gas production.
Chevron and Exxon have such difficulty in falling-price environments because what they sell is a commodity. By contrast, companies with substantial brand power prefer low inflation because it keeps their costs low while allowing them to continue commanding premium prices for their products. Nike, for instance, owes much of its long-term growth to its success in building a worldwide branding presence that drives consumer demand irrespective of its products' price tag. Coca-Cola has long reaped the rewards of commanding higher prices than generic cola sellers, and much of that owes to marketing that justifies wider profit margins over its costs.
Watch inflation now
Because so many Dow stocks lead their industries with noncommodity goods, the Dow generally prefers low inflation. But commodity stocks like Exxon and Chevron can go against the grain, forcing investors to consider both sides of the inflation debate in their portfolios.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


