Based on the aggregated intelligence of 180,000-plus investors participating in Motley Fool CAPS, the Fool's free investing community, oil and gas giant Chevron (NYSE: CVX) has earned a coveted five-star ranking.
With that in mind, let's take a closer look at Chevron's business and see what CAPS investors are saying about the stock right now.
Chevron facts
Sources: S&P Capital IQ and Motley Fool CAPS.
On CAPS, 96% of the 4,171 of the members who have rated Chevron believe the stock will outperform the S&P 500 going forward.   
Just last month, one of those Fools, TempoAllegro, tapped the company as a well-managed income opportunity: "[Chevron] has good management that is investor-friendly, and it is a good company in its field. Generous dividend and strategic focus of the company make this an excellent idea now."
If you want market-topping returns, you need to put together the best portfolio you can. Owning exceptional stocks is a surefire way to secure your financial future. Of course, despite a strong five-star rating, Chevron may not be your top choice.
We've found another energy play we are incredibly excited about -- excited enough to dub it "The Only Energy Stock You'll Ever Need." We have compiled a special free report for investors to uncover this stock today. The report is 100% free, but it won't be here forever, so click here to access it now.
Want to see how well (or not so well) the stocks in this series are performing? Follow the new TrackPoisedTo CAPS account.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



There's yet another critical election in Greece this weekend that could determine the fate of the eurozone. Closer to home, consumer sentiment fell sharply in early June from its five-year high reading in May. But stock markets don't seem to be concerned in the slightest, as the Dow Jones Industrials (INDEX: ^DJI) soared yet again, with investors complacent in their belief that central banks will once again save them from whatever may come from the European debt crisis. By the close, the Dow had jumped 115 points, marking its second straight triple-digit advance. Most of the Dow's component stocks advanced, and the broader market actually posted even larger percentage gains.
As another mark of the market's confidence, the top-performing stock in the Dow was actually down early this morning. Bank of America (NYSE: BAC) closed up almost 3%, recovering as Reuters reported that the bank's delinquency rates and credit-card charge-offs fell during May from April's figures. A macroeconomic shock could make those figures turn in the other direction, but for now, Bank of America and several of its peers seem to be benefiting from improved financial health from their customers.
Chevron (NYSE: CVX) rose 2.4% today even as crude oil prices rose only modestly. In the past, monetary easing and other extraordinary measures from central banks have spurred investors to increase risk in their portfolios, which has then boosted oil prices. Investors may be trying to get a jump on the competition by assuming such a move will happen this time around as well, although ExxonMobil (NYSE: XOM) rose a more modest 1.3%. That could set up investors for potential disappointment, but for now, confidence still reigns over fear.
Finally, tech companies did well overall. In addition to Microsoft's rise after reports of its buyout of Yammer, IBM (NYSE: IBM) jumped more than 2% as well. The tech sector has been resilient throughout the ups and downs of the economy over the past several  years, and with many seeing value characteristics from what were once growth giants, both Microsoft and IBM have started attracting interest from a new set of investors.
How now, Dow?
Where the Dow will move next week is anyone's guess, but in the long run, we think some Dow stocks have particularly good potential. Take a look at The Motley Fool's brand-new special report, "The 3 Dow Stocks Dividend Investors Need," and get the names of some of the Dow's most lucrative investment opportunities. Don't wait to get this free report; accept this invitation to get your copy right now.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



