This week has been relatively boring, with little volatility in the post-QE3 announcement calm. However, expect things to pick up tomorrow ahead of options expiration on Friday. As for today, the Dow Jones Industrial Average (INDEX: ^DJI) finished up 13 points, or 0.1%, matched by nearly identical gains in the S&P 500 and Nasdaq.
On the Dow, the vast majority of the index was in the green, although several individual components dragged down the overall performance. The largest decliner was ExxonMobil (NYSE: XOM), as the oil major saw its shares drop 1.2% with crude oil prices continuing their weeklong freefall. Sustained selling has driven the price per barrel from $100 down to $91 in just a few short days. While some want to point to Saudi Arabia's desire to drive prices down, more likely we're seeing a trifecta of post-QE3 rally profit-taking, larger-than-expected inventory data, and continued concerns over a global slowdown, despite strength in the domestic housing market. Fellow Dow component Chevron (NYSE: CVX) also sold off, but to a much more modest 0.3%.
Other notable decliners include Hewlett-Packard, down 0.8% amid rumors it's looking to sell IT subsidiary EDS -- yes, the 4-year-old train wreck of an acquisition that prompted new CEO Meg Whitman to write down an $8 billion non-cash charge. HP denies the sale, but if the company wanted to completely divorce itself from former CEO Mark Hurd's purchase, now, while the company is reorganizing, would not be a bad time to do it.
Finally, Intel (Nasdaq: INTC) was down 0.9% on news that highly regarded Executive Vice President Sean Maloney, who ran the company's China operations, will be retiring. However, he was no longer seen as a likely CEO candidate after suffering a stroke. His recovery has been remarkable and his contributions to Intel considerate, but today's move is not about the loss of an executive but the continuation of concerns over the state of the PC market that has weighed on the chipmaker ever since a negative earnings preview earlier this month, highlighting a weak upcoming quarter.
To find out whether Intel is a bad news buy amid all the negativity, download our new premium Intel report. It goes through key opportunities and risks facing Intel and comes with a full year of updates. Get your copy today by clicking here.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



We're now halfway through the week and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (INDEX: ^DJI) has hardly moved a smidgen. For the day, it was up a meager 13 points, or 0.10%. Despite its apparent apathy, there were nevertheless three important pieces of news to hit the wire today.
1. Oil's suspicious decline
Since the beginning of the week, the price of oil futures has suspiciously declined a staggering 8%, from $99 on Monday down to $91.80 at the end of trading today.
A closer look reveals that it ratcheted down in two separate but brief instances. It fell off a proverbial cliff on Monday, dropping from $98.68 at approximately 2:18 p.m. ET down to $95.53 at 2:43 p.m., a decline of 3.2%. It then did roughly the same thing today, dropping from $96.07 at approximately 4:45 a.m. ET down to $91.43 at 2:07 p.m., a 4.8% dip.
The declines followed comments out of Saudi Arabia that it wants to see lower prices and is accordingly intent on keeping its output high. Also, earlier in the week, traders began speculating that the White House may release oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve to spur the economy. According to an article on MarketWatch.com, White House officials said today that they are monitoring oil markets and that "the president insists all options for dealing with [high oil prices] remain on the table," including a release from the SPR.
Regardless of the reason, the trend weighed heavily on shares of both ExxonMobil (NYSE: XOM), which led the Dow down by losing 1.18%, and Chevron (NYSE: CVX), which fell by a more modest 0.32%.
2. Housing's nascent recovery
Aside from oil's decline, consumers had another reason to cheer today, as more evidence of a nascent housing recovery emerged.
Early this morning, the U.S. Commerce Department released data showing that construction of single-family homes reached its highest level in more than two years. According to the report, single-family housing starts rose by 5.5% in August compared with July. Total housing starts, which includes construction of multifamily structures, were up 2.3% last month. The news led my colleague John Divine to note, "Housing may finally be driving growth in the American economy again."
A report from the National Association of Realtors has since bellowed the flames. It revealed that sales of previously owned homes rose in August by 7.8% from July to their highest level in 27 months. Additionally, the national average existing-home sale price rose by 9.5% on a year-over-year basis, marking the sixth consecutive month of price increases.
In response to this news, shares of Home Depot (NYSE: HD) led the Dow higher, closing up by 1.04%. The home improvement retailer was second to only Disney (NYSE: DIS), which closed up 1.54% after it was announced that J.C. Penney will open more than 500 Disney-themed boutiques in its stores throughout the country.
3. Japan's central bank starts the presses
The final piece of news fueling the Dow today was the Bank of Japan's revelation that it will expand its ongoing bond-buying program from 70 trillion yen to 80 trillion yen, an increase of approximately $126 billion.
As I discussed earlier today, many commentators see the move as a reaction to similar measures in the West, most notably the United States and Europe. Following the announcement, the yen traded lower by more than half a percent. Needless to say, this will come as a relief to any and all Japanese manufacturers that sell goods abroad.
3 Dow stocks dividend investors need
In light of the furious volatility in oil prices and unpredictability of monetary policy, investing can often be a nerve-racking experience. It's accordingly sometimes nice to own stocks that you don't have to worry about and pay a great dividend. For a list of three fitting this description, simply download our most recent free report by clicking here now.



Before you consider The Walt Disney Company, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and The Walt Disney Company wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



