In today's edition, Joel discusses ExxonMobil and what to watch for tomorrow when the company announces second-quarter earnings. Exxon is the first large integrated oil company to report, and the company will need oil revenues to offset its dismal natural gas segment. With a 50/50 split between oil and gas production, Exxon is more susceptible to poor natural gas prices than its Dow competitor, Chevron, so be sure to follow the effects that XTO (Exxon's natural gas arm) will have on the bottom line tomorrow.
Decreasing oil prices had an adverse effect on all exploration and production companies this past quarter, but the price of crude has been increasing over the past month, with international prices now inching over the century mark. With that said, we have have been on the the lookout for some intriguing energy plays that are set to soar again as oil prices increase. Be sure to check out The Motley Fool's "3 Stocks for $100 Oil." you can get free access to this special report by clicking here. Be sure not to miss out on this excellent report!



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



After three straight days of triple-digit losses, the Dow Jones Industrial Average (INDEX: ^DJI) gained a bit this morning, up 0.37% as investors saw buying opportunities.
Speculation of Federal Reserve assistance intensified, since the Fed promised to act if the economic situation became dire, but it did not indicate any actions officially. On the flip side, new home sales slipped 8.4% in June, coming down hard from a two-year high in May.
Earnings were mixed in the overall markets, as Apple's earnings disappointment dragged down the S&P 500, but the Dow inched upward.
Caterpillar (NYSE: CAT) shares lost ground this morning despite a good earnings report. Investors cheered its 67% Q2 profit growth alongside an EPS of $2.54 that crushed expectations, but the negative housing data sent shares down 0.49%. The company is the sixth-most-heavily weighted stock in the index, so it moves the average substantially, but the conglomerate also provides a microcosm for the overall economy.
Fellow Dow component Boeing (NYSE: BA) soared thanks to great news across the board. The company dominated earnings, hitting an EPS of $1.27 against expectations of $1.12, and grew revenue to $20 billion. With the recent spike in sales going back to the Farnborough Airshow, Boeing also raised its full-year outlook. As if to affirm this decision, Aeromexico committed to buying 100 planes earlier this morning. Boeing shares jumped 2.3%.
AT&T's (NYSE: T) big day came a day late. After taking a huge fall yesterday despite beating expectations on earnings, the company gained about 2% on the morning. Revenue stayed steady, so the earnings jump came mostly from decreased iPhone sales ahead of the iPhone release. Telecom companies subsidize the popular phones in order to guarantee contracts, but the policy hurts margins. However, its ability to keep revenue steady, coupled with competitor Verizon's positive report, point toward optimism in the telecom sector.
Finally, not every stock joined the bounce-back party. Chevron (NYSE: CVX) dropped almost 1%, and crude oil slipped 1.45%. The company announced earnings on Friday, and analysts' expectations have fallen over the past few months. The overall energy sector remains mixed, but a drop in sales from competitor ConocoPhillips led many investors to fear the worst.
All the mixed news leaves many investors looking for clues about what to do next. If you're in that boat, consider trying a long-term, steady-income approach: dividend stocks. The Motley Fool's free report, "The 3 Dow Stocks Dividend Investors Need," identifies three stocks with dividends to give investors steady earnings -- and the outlook to see share prices rise, too. It's completely free, so get your copy before it's gone.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



