
OIL SUPERTANKERS. SOURCE: PIXABAY
Picking between Chevron (NYSE: CVX) and ExxonMobil (NYSE: XOM) is like picking between two thoroughbreds. Both companies have long track records of delivering solid returns. Both lead the industry in certain metrics, and each has its own distinct advantages. Given the current energy environment, which company is the better buy?
ExxonMobil is safer in challenging times
In terms of performance, ExxonMobil has retained more of its value in bad times. In 2008, ExxonMobil fell just 14.8% versus Chevron's drop of 20.7%. For the current energy period beginning in late 2014, ExxonMobil declined around 30% from peak to trough, outperforming Chevron's decline of 45%. 
One reason for the better performance in bad times is that ExxonMobil is the stronger company financially. ExxonMobil has an "AA+" credit rating, versus Chevron's "AA" credit rating. The company has a better debt-to-equity ratio of 0.23 versus Chevron's 0.25. ExxonMobil is free cash flow positive, with the company reporting free cash flow of $6.5 billion in 2015 and management cutting the capital expenditures budget for 2016. Chevron reported negative free cash flow of around $10 billion in 2015, and analysts expect Chevron to burn $15 billion in 2016. 
Another reason for the better performance is ExxonMobil has a larger downstream and chemicals division, which offers more stability when crude prices decline. In 2015, ExxonMobil's downstream and chemicals unit reported a profit of almost $11 billion, versus Chevron's downstream and chemicals operation that made $7.6 billion for the company last year. For the first quarter of 2016, ExxonMobil's downstream and chemicals division earned a cumulative $2.3 billion, versus Chevron's comparable unit which only earned $735 million.  
ExxonMobil also has lower upstream costs. Although Brent averaged just $34 per barrel for the first quarter of 2016, ExxonMobil's upstream unit barely lost any money, losing just $76 million for the time period. Chevron's upstream unit, lost on the other hand, reported a loss of $1.46 billion.
ExxonMobil's production and reserves are larger
ExxonMobil is without question a larger company than Chevron. At the end of 2015, ExxonMobil had proved reserves of 24.7 billion barrels and a resource base of 91 billion oil-equivalent barrels, compared with Chevron's proved reserves of 11.17 billion BOE and resource base of 68 billion oil-equivalent barrels. ExxonMobil's production is also larger, with the company producing 4.1 million BOE per day in 2015, compared with Chevron's 2.622 million BOE per day.


Chevron has more growth ahead 
Fortunately for Chevron shareholders, the company's current results aren't necessarily indicative of its future performance. One reason for Chevron's larger losses in its upstream segment for the first quarter is that it has more pre-productive projects that consume a lot of capital but haven't yielded any oil or gas yet. Because many of those pre-productive projects will come online or ramp up by 2017, however, Chevron's production is expected to grow to between 2.9 million and 3 million BOE per day in 2017 (excluding any potential asset sales), from its 2015 average of 2.622 million BOE per day. ExxonMobil, meanwhile, expects production to stay flat, with management guiding for production of 4 million to 4.2 million BOE per day in 2020, from 2015's 4.1 million BOE per day. Chevron's added production will meaningfully increase its upstream margins and cash flow to a point where the company can break-even in terms of cash flow if Brent averages $52 per barrel for 2017. 
Investor takeaway
Investors can't go wrong with either stock. Both companies have a low cost of production because of their scale and efficiency, with ExxonMobil earning $16.1 billion in profits and Chevron reporting $4.9 billion in net income when Brent averaged $52 per barrel last year. Both are run by excellent management teams who know how to allocate capital across the commodity cycle to deliver value. Both companies are also dividend aristocrats, meaning they have raised their annual payout for at least 25 consecutive years. ExxonMobil has raised its dividend for 34 consecutive years, while Chevron has raised it for 28 straight years.
ExxonMobil is the safer company, with greater free cash flow and a stronger balance sheet, but Chevron has more growth, and a higher dividend yield. If the long-term price of crude averages $50 per barrel or less, ExxonMobil's stronger finances make it the better buy. If long-term crude prices average higher, Chevron's dividend will be safe, and its higher dividend yield and more growth make it the better investment. Given the improving fundamentals in the sector and the direction crude prices are trending toward, Chevron is the better purchase at the moment.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



SOURCE: FLICKR.
The Obama administration recently issued regulations designed to reduce the number of well blowouts offshore to prevent another Deepwater Horizon-like event. The explosion of the Deepwater Horizon in 2010 produced the largest offshore oil spill in American history and cost BP more than $40 billion in penalties and clean-up fees.
Although the White House says the new regulations will cost less than $1 billion over the next 10 years, ExxonMobil has said the new rules could cost the industry as much as $25 billion over the next decade and could stifle deepwater drilling in the Gulf of Mexico. Let's examine how the new rulings affect Chevron (NYSE: CVX) and its deepwater prospects.
Controversial regulation
Although they're intended to make drilling wells offshore safer, the new regulations will add extra costs. They'll require real-time monitoring of certain types of high-pressure or deepwater drilling. They'll require more testing and maintenance on blowout preventers. 
The energy industry thinks the regulations go too far. Because of the Deepwater Horizon incident, the regulations governing offshore drilling had already been strengthened. New regulations were put in place to address well-bore integrity and well-control procedures and equipment. Operators were required to obtain third-party certification and inspection of proposed drilling processes. 
Because of their added costs, the regulations could cost the offshore Gulf of Mexico industry many jobs. Analysts generally peg deepwater as requiring $60-per-barrel crude or higher to be economical, versus the $50 to $60 per barrel for shale. Because of the higher costs, more upfront capital needed, and longer lead times, the new rulings will make companies interested investing in deepwater think twice. Some analysts think the net result of the new regulations will slash deepwater activity in the Gulf of Mexico by 70% over the next 20 years and cost 190,000 jobs.
Other analysts don't think the regulations will have as big of a negative effect due to the fact that the estimated costs of the regulations are spread out over 10 years. ExxonMobil and Chevron management didn't really talk about the impact of the new regulations on their first quarter conference calls, for example.  
How the new regulations affect Chevron
Given that it was the largest leaseholder in the Gulf of Mexico at the end of 2015, Chevron will be negatively affected by the new regulations. 
Because of its strategic goals and the need to raise cash to support its dividend, Chevron has deemed its Gulf of Mexico shelf assets as non-core and plans to divest the assets by the end of 2017. Analysts believed Chevron could realize more than $1 billion for the assets. Because the new industry regulations increase the cost to operate offshore, Chevron will realize less in sales of those assets on the shelf.

CHEVRON DEEPWATER ACTIVITIES IN GULF OF MEXICO SOURCE: CHEVRON INVESTOR RELATIONS.
Although it plans to divest its more-mature operations on the shelf, Chevron is still committed to the deepwater Gulf of Mexico. Chevron is one of the top leaseholders in the area, and the company holds leases over very promising reservoirs, such as the Wilcox. Because Chevron has already done much of the work exploring and building infrastructure over the reservoir, the company's brownfield wells have promising economics and can break-even if Brent trades at $20 to $40 per barrel. The new regulations are unlikely to cause Chevron to shelve those projects and the company plans to focus 80% of its development spend in the Gulf on those brownfield deepwater opportunities over the next few years.
Given that greenfield projects will require more work and have higher break-evens, the new regulations will likely dissuade Chevron from investing more in unproven or less developed locations, however. The net effect could be less production growth for Chevron in the Gulf overall. 
The new regulations might cause Chevron to invest less in the Gulf and more into the Permian Basin. Earlier in the year, Chevron announced that it was mothballing a $500 million deepwater Gulf of Mexico development in favor for investing in the Permian basin because the economics in the Permian were better. Given the higher costs in the Gulf due to the new regulations, Chevron management might decide to divert even more capital away from the Gulf and into shale and tight plays.
Because the regulations do not apply to projects outside of U.S. sovereignty, the new rules might also cause Chevron to invest more into its operations in deepwater West Africa and deepwater Brazil. Chevron holds working interest in several deepwater fields located in the Campos Basin that are promising.   
Investor takeaway
The new regulations will cost Chevron money and could cause the company to focus more on brownfield projects and divert some investment from the deepwater Gulf of Mexico to the Permian. Given Chevron's improving costs in the Permian and the basin's promising potential, Chevron could ultimately come out ahead in the long run from the change in investment, however. If the new regulations reduce overall supply in the long run, some of the negative effects of the regulations might be offset by the increase in crude price caused by the drop in supply.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


