
OIL PIPELINE. SOURCE: PIXABAY.
On May 13, militants attacked a Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) oil pipeline in Nigeria, causing serious disruption to supply. The explosion wasn't a lone event. In the week before, militants knocked out Chevron's Okan offshore facility in the Nigerian Delta, affecting around 35,000 barrels per day of crude production. Given that Chevron has substantial operations and interests in the country, let's analyze how Nigeria's militant trouble affects Chevron's financials. 
Because of the low oil prices, Nigeria's oil revenue has declined by more than 50% from 2014, and the government has had to make some serious budget cuts. Because the government cut a program that paid militants to protect facilities that they once attacked, many militants have seen their incomes fall. One group, the Delta Avengers, has attacked energy infrastructure in the oil-rich Nigerian Delta as a way of protesting the cuts. The Delta Avengers would like the government to compensate the natives of their oil-producing region more for the resources they produce. They have vowed to continue their attacks until their demands are met. Because of the severity of their crimes, Nigeria's government has branded the Delta Avengers as terrorists and has refused to meet their demands.
The escalating militant situation in Nigeria has seriously disrupted production. As a result of the attacks and other factors, Nigeria's production has declined from its normal rate of 2.2 million to 2.4 million barrels per day to less than 1.6 million. Many investors think production could fall further to 1.2 million barrels per day if the current dynamic isn't reversed. Unless the military defeats the militants or the government makes a deal with the groups, the supply disruptions are likely to continue. 
Chevron isn't the only company that has seen its operations disrupted. In February, one of Royal Dutch Shell's (NYSE:RDS.A
) (NYSE:RDS.B
) pipelines to an export terminal was bombed. The bombing caused a bottleneck that has reduced production by 300,000 barrels per day. As of mid-May, the bombed pipeline hasn't come online yet. 
The attacking militants represent a vexing problem for Chevron. Nigeria is an important country for the company. Nine percent of Chevron's net unrisked resource base of 68 billion barrels of oil equivalent resides there. The Niger Delta, which has been the main location of the supply disruptions, accounts for a substantial amount of Chevron's production. In 2015, the company's net daily production in the Delta averaged 65,000 barrels of crude oil, 6,000 barrels of LPG, and 229 million cubic feet of natural gas. That's around 110,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day, or 4.2% of Chevron's current production rate of 2.62 million barrels of oil equivalent per day. If the situation gets worse, Chevron's substantial deepwater operations near Nigeria, which produces another 160,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day, could be affected if militants attack export terminals.
If the supply disruptions become serious, they could trim Chevron's total production by a few percentage points. That would shave off around a billion dollars in revenue if the disruptions last one year. The disruptions would also make it harder for Chevron to realize fair market value for any operations that it's thinking about divesting in the nation. 

The recent events in Nigeria illustrate how difficult it is to sustain production at low oil prices. Although many OPEC countries are blessed with abundant reserves with full cycle costs that can easily beat that of any shale driller, those same countries also have hidden costs that they will eventually have to pay. Some of the revenue garnered from production is owed to citizens of the country. When those revenues decline sharply, the citizens won't be happy and might disrupt production.
Because crude inventories around the world have set record highs and production has been greater than demand, the market has largely ignored geopolitical risks. As supply and demand come more in balance in the second half of the year, however, the market may pay more attention to potential distruptions. If that occurs, the dynamic is bullish for oil prices and ultimately for Chevron shares. 
Although Chevron has substantial Nigerian operations and the company's production could drop by a few hundred thousand barrels per day because of the militant activity, the increase in crude prices from the decline in Nigerian production will probably offset most of the revenue losses.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



OIL TANKS. SOURCE: PIXABAY 
With the Energy Information Administration predicting that Brent prices will hit $76 per share in 2017 and many analysts anticipating a supply shortfall in the back half of 2016, the worst seems over for the crude sector. Given that energy fundamentals are on the mend, and risk appetite is reemerging, some investors wonder whether Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) might make an acquisition. Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.A
) (NYSE:RDS.B
) did buy BG Group in 2015, after all. Although the prospect that Chevron could make a transformative acquisition certainty sounds appealing, the scenario is unlikely. Here are three reasons why.
Potential takeover candidates aren't exactly cheap. Given the 70% rally in crude spot prices, many quality shale companies no longer trade for bargain prices. When factoring a takeover premium, the rationale for acquiring another company might not make much sense unless crude prices rally substantially. Given the uncertainties in the market, substantially higher crude prices aren't guaranteed, and pulling the trigger on a big acquisition is risky.
Another factor working against M&A is that company bid-ask prices are wide. Earlier in the cycle, ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
) approached several potential takeover targets but failed to make any deals because the take-over targets asked for too much. Given ExxonMobil's experience and the crude price surge, there's no reason to think Chevron will get a better deal. 
If Chevron makes an acquisition large enough to move the needle, it will probably need to fund some of the acquisition with cash. Given that analysts anticipate Chevron to report $15 billion in negative free cash flow this year because of its large percentage of pre-productive projects, Chevron can't take on more debt without making some sacrifices on core principles such as consistently maintaining and raising the dividend and keeping the debt ratio below 0.30 most of the time. Given that Chevron management has said the dividend is its No. 1 priority and that having a strong balance sheet is a major competitive advantage, it's unlikely to have a change of heart. The negatives of cutting the dividend or endangering the balance sheet simply outweigh the upside of making an acquisition. 
Perhaps most importantly, Chevron doesn't really need to make an acquisition to do well. Unlike Royal Dutch Shell, which struggled with finding reserve replacements before its BG Group acquisition, Chevron has been able to successfully replace its reserves. The company has one of the industry's best reserve replacement ratios over the past five years, at 113%. Chevron has also plenty of places to invest where it can get a solid return on investment. Chevron owns around 2 million net acres in the Permian that holds total potentially recoverable oil equivalent resources of 9 billion barrels. The company estimates that 4,000 of its well locations in the Permian can offer a 10% return at $50 per barrel, and 5,500 well locations can deliver a 10% return at $60 per barrel.
In addition, Chevron's production is expected to rise sharply organically. Because of the ramp-ups of major pre-productive projects such as Gorgon and Wheatstone over the next two years, management expects Chevron's production to rise to 2.9 million to 3 million barrels per day in 2017 from 2.62 million barrels per day now.
One of the main reasons long-term investors like Chevron is its management knows how to deliver value through the commodity cycle. Its management has run the company conservatively enough to raise the dividend for 28 straight years through multiple booms and busts. Conservative investors don't necessarily pull the trigger when the opportunity isn't guaranteed to pay off. 
At this point, the valuations of potential acquisitions are too high, and Chevron doesn't really need to pull the trigger because it could get better returns by developing its own resource base.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


