In May, I announced my intention to create a portfolio that embodied life's basic needs. To that end, over a period of 10 weeks I detailed 10 diverse companies that I think will outperform the broad-based S&P 500 over a three-year period because of their ability to outperform in both bull and bear markets, as well as command incredible pricing power in nearly any economic environment.
If you'd like a closer look at my reasoning behind each selection, just click on any, or all, of the following portfolio components:
Let's look at how our portfolio of basic-needs stocks fared last week.
Company
Cost Basis
Shares
Total Value
Return
Waste Management
$42.60
23.24
$1,013.73
2.4%
Intel 
$23.22
42.64
$1,035.73
4.6%
NextEra Energy
$87.94
11.26
$931.31
(5.9%)
MasterCard
$645.57
1.53
$1,205.59
22.1%
Chevron
$124.95
7.93
$950.81
(4%)
Select Medical
$8.96
110.49
$1,075.07
8.6%
Ford
$17.50
56.57
$938.50
(5.2%)
American Water Works
$43.13
22.96
$936.77
(5.4%)
Procter & Gamble 
$81.29
12.18
$1,003.27
1.3%
AvalonBay Communities
$133.95
7.39
$881.18
(11%)
Cash
$0.88
Dividends receivable
$114.39
Total commission
($100.00)
Original investment
$10,000.00
Total portfolio value
$10,087.23
0.9%
S&P 500 performance
3.8%
Performance relative to S&P 500
(2.9%)
SOURCE: YAHOO! FINANCE, AUTHOR'S CALCULATIONS.
Show me the money!
As you might have suspected with a portfolio full of cash-flow divas, this week's primary theme was all about "showing me the money," with the receipt of two dividends in our pockets and the announcement of a sizable dividend increase by another company.
Last Tuesday we received our $1 quarterly stipend from integrated oil and gas exploration and production giant Chevron (NYSE:CVX
). Although the exploration side of Chevron's business hasn't been the best lately, with the company curtailing its development of the Rosebank project because of costs and exploration protests in Romania, its sheer size and non-E&P operations are picking up the slack. Unless we were to see an absolute plunge in oil prices, Chevron's cash flow appears safe, and a dividend hike in 2014 appears very likely.
The same story goes for alternative-energy-based electric utility NextEra Energy (NYSE:NEE
), which today paid out $0.66 per share to shareholders. NextEra's dividend certainly won't be the highest in the sector, given the high debt load it took on when it built out its network of wind and solar energy projects, but the company is setting itself up for sustainably lower long-term costs than its peers, which should eventually help that dividend push higher.
Finally, payment processing facilitator MasterCard (NYSE:MA
) wowed Wall Street and investors and blew past $800 per share at one point after announcing plans to split its share price 10-for-1, raise its quarterly payout by 83% to $1.10 per share from $0.60, and launch a $3.5 billion share repurchase program, which will reduce the number of shares outstanding and increase EPS. This move is a win for shareholders all the way around. Even though the new yield is still just 0.55%, it's better than the 0.3% yield shareholders had been receiving. With many emerging markets still operating in cash, MasterCard could have double-digit growth written in its cards for decades to come.
A renewed interest
It's been a bit of a rough ride for residential REIT AvalonBay Communities (NYSE:AVB
) since this portfolio launched more than four months ago, but the stock received a timely upgrade from hold to buy this past week from research firm KeyBanc, which also placed a price target on Avalon of $139 (leaving 17% upside from Friday's close to KeyBanc's target price). KeyBanc's upgrade was based on AvalonBay's attractive valuation and improving fundamentals.
But I feel the upgrade makes even more sense given the strong U.S. economic data we've witnessed recently. This data could necessitate a move by the FOMC to taper QE3, potentially leading to a rise in interest rates. Higher rates are good news for a rental-community operator like AvalonBay, which thrives when higher lending rates push prospective homeowners back into its rental communities.
An Obamacare bump
Finally, hospital and outpatient rehabilitation center operator Select Medical (NYSE:SEM
) spiked higher this week despite a lack of company-specific news. What I would point out, though, is that we were privy to the Department of Health and Human Services release of the Obamacare's enrollment figures through the end of November this past week. The data didn't show particularly inspiring enrollment figures from previously uninsured individuals, but the sheer number of applicants and Medicaid-eligible enrollees is pushing hopes up that hospitals like Select Medical will see smaller revenue write-offs beginning in 2014. As one of the deepest values in the sector, I continue to believe that Select Medical could head much higher.
Back to basics
With the market suffering its worst weekly loss in months, the Basic Needs portfolio gained the most ground on the S&P 500 in nearly as much time. Big gains from MasterCard and Select Medical countered by minimal downside from other stable cash-flow-portfolio components helped show why this portfolio should be in great shape were we to experience any significant downside trading. Over the long haul I'm still quite confident this portfolio will handily outperform the S&P 500.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
) hasn't given investors the returns they had hoped to see in 2013, with a 16% jump lagging behind the 21% that the Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI
) has produced so far this year. Yet even though Exxon and rival BP (NYSE:BP
) spent most of the year trying to catch up to fellow oil giant Chevron (NYSE:CVX
), a recent rebound suggests Exxon might be the company to beat in 2014.
For consumers who've paid high prices at the pump for gas for years, the troubles that ExxonMobil has had to deal with might seem trivial. Yet even though relatively high oil prices have supported the use of unconventional production methods like hydraulic fracturing to help Exxon, Chevron, and BP boost their overall production, Exxon in particular still has to work hard just to keep its massive output totals from following the natural rate of decline of its existing wells. Yet could favorable conditions in the natural-gas market help boost Exxon's fortune in the coming year? Let's take a closer look at ExxonMobil's prospects for 2014.
EXXON'S PARTNERSHIP WITH ROSNEFT COULD BE EXTREMELY IMPORTANT IN 2014 AND BEYOND. SOURCE: ROSNEFT MEDIA RELATIONS.
Stats on ExxonMobil
Average stock target price
$96.32
Full-year 2013 EPS estimate
$7.46
Full-year 2014 EPS estimate
$7.90
Full-year 2013 sales growth estimate
(7.7%)
Full-year 2014 sales growth estimate
(2.9%)
Forward P/E
12.4
SOURCE: YAHOO FINANCE.
Will ExxonMobil soar from here?
Judging from the consensus view of most analysts, ExxonMobil doesn't have any upside left for 2014. With the stock above the current target price, even expanding earnings prospects haven't been enough to get Wall Street into Exxon's corner.
Exxon faces what could be a tough environment for oil prices in 2014. Even though the International Energy Agency boosted its 2014 projections for global oil demand last week, the opening of Iranian oil exports following the oil-producing giant's agreement on nuclear issues could add even more supply to the market. As a result, a number of commodities analysts have come out with bearish calls for crude prices, with Barclays forecasting a drop in Brent crude to $101 per barrel and Deutsche Bank following suit with a call for $98 Brent and $89 West Texas Intermediate prices. Obviously, those calls hurt Chevron and BP just as much as they would Exxon.
One big factor for ExxonMobil's future is whether spreads between domestic and global crude oil prices widen or narrow in 2014. During the third quarter, prices for WTI crude approached those of more expensive Brent oil, which knocked Exxon's refining profits down sharply. During the fourth quarter, though, those spreads have widened again. If plentiful domestic oil production leads to continued disparities in oil prices, then a bounce-back for Exxon's refining operations could help support overall earnings in the coming year.
Still, production is an important consideration. BP has moved back into the Gulf of Mexico in search of greater production, working with Exxon on the Thunder Horse platform, which is BP's largest producing deepwater field. Meanwhile, Chevron sees boosting production by 700,000 oil-equivalent barrels per day, more than a quarter above current levels. Exxon will have to work hard to keep production up by capitalizing on areas like the Arctic without sacrificing its historical discipline to do projects only if they produce adequate returns on capital.
Yet what many people neglect to consider about Exxon is its big presence in the natural-gas business. Highly successful liquefied natural gas export terminals built in conjunction with Qatar Petroleum have demonstrated Exxon's leadership in the LNG industry, even as Chevron aims to ramp up its own LNG presence in order to maximize the value of its massive nat-gas finds in western Australia. Closer to home, U.S. natural gas prices have soared recently, although much of the spike came from cold weather that caused a typical knee-jerk reaction higher. Nevertheless, Exxon stands to gain a lot if the rise becomes permanent, with hopes that its acquisition of XTO Energy four years ago will eventually prove to have been a visionary move.
In the end, ExxonMobil's performance in 2014 will rely on the company's ability to keep production volumes up and on global markets for crude oil, natural gas, and refined energy products. If a recovering economy boosts demand, even the pace of new finds across the industry might be insufficient to keep prices from defying analysts' expectations and climbing higher. That could produce Exxon's best chance to beat out Chevron and BP in 2014, as long as Exxon's share of acquiring lucrative new energy opportunities bests those of its rivals.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Click here to add ExxonMobil to My Watchlist, which can find all of our Foolish analysis on it and all your other stocks.
