As popular as the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI
) is, it has one interesting characteristic that's different from most other market benchmarks: The Dow is a price-weighted average, which means that a company's share price is what determines that company's impact on the average.
That gives the highest-priced stocks in the average disproportionate influence over the Dow. Let's take a closer look at the three highest-priced stocks in the Dow and examine what's going on with these key companies.
IBM (NYSE:IBM
), $210.59
IBM has been around a lot longer than most of the other tech companies in the Dow, so some might argue that giving it as much weight as it gets -- more than 10% of the entire average -- leaves the Dow behind the times. Yet IBM has come a long way from the days of the electric typewriter.
In particular, IBM has moved beyond its hardware roots to emphasize higher-margin business lines like information technology services. Most recently, IBM has started moving into cloud computing, a high-growth industry that has become the next battleground for tech supremacy. IBM has lofty goals, but it has performed well and stands as a worthy representative of the tech sector.
Chevron (NYSE:CVX
), $117.50
You can see the most obvious impact of how price-weighting affects the Dow in the energy sector. ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
) towers above the rest of the big oil companies, yet by virtue of its higher share price, Chevron has more influence than Exxon.
Both energy giants have plenty of potential, especially as oil prices remain reasonably high and new opportunities for growth around the world abound. But Chevron's recent forays into South America have at least one Fool contributor concerned about whether the company is pushing too hard to try to grow. When you combine Chevron's and Exxon's weights, they come reasonably close to giving the Dow fair representation in energy.
3M (NYSE:MMM
), $94.96
3M has always been known for its innovation. With a wide range of products spanning across several industries, the conglomerate has plenty of interesting prospects to pursue.
Most recently, 3M decided to buy specialty ceramics company Ceradyne (NYSE:CRDN
). The $860 million price tag represents a 43% premium, but with applications from combat armor to power generation, Ceradyne's product line should make a good addition to 3M's already formidable line of energy and advanced materials.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Based on the aggregated intelligence of 180,000-plus investors participating in Motley Fool CAPS, the Fool's free investing community, oil and gas giant Chevron (NYSE: CVX) has earned a coveted five-star ranking.
With that in mind, let's take a closer look at Chevron's business and see what CAPS investors are saying about the stock right now.
Chevron facts
Sources: S&P Capital IQ and Motley Fool CAPS.
On CAPS, 95% of the 341 of the members who have rated Chevron believe the stock will outperform the S&P 500 going forward.
Just last week, one of those Fools, adilimani, succinctly summed up the Chevron bull case for our community: "Undervalued stock due to bad economy and low oil prices. However, they are so diversified and are a part of almost every single market related to energy, oil, transportation, purification etc. Good dividend too."
If you want market-topping returns, you need to put together the best portfolio you can. Owning exceptional stocks is a surefire way to secure your financial future. Of course, despite its five-star rating, Chevron may not be your top choice.
We've found another energy play we are incredibly excited about -- excited enough to dub it "The Only Energy Stock You'll Ever Need." We have compiled a special free report for investors to uncover this stock today. The report is 100% free, but it won't be here forever, so click here to access it now.
Want to see how well (or not so well) the stocks in this series are performing? Follow the TrackPoisedTo CAPS account.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021




A deal between two of energy's major players was announced this morning. Marathon Petroleum (NYSE:MPC
) will be purchasing a number of Gulf-area assets from BP (NYSE:BP
), including a large refinery located in Texas City, Texas. The deal is reportedly worth upwards of $2.5 billion. Watch the video above for Fool.com analyst Taylor Muckerman's full report on the story.

There are many different ways to play the energy sector, and Motley Fool analysts have uncovered another major player that's dominating its industry. This company is a leading provider of equipment and components used in drilling and production operations, and it's poised to profit in a big way. For the name and a detailed analysis of this company that's set to prosper for years to come, check out our special free report, "The Only Energy Stock You'll Ever Need." This is a limited-time offer, so don't miss out on your opportunity to discover this under-the-radar company before the rest of the market does. Click here now to claim your free copy today.



Before you consider BP p.l.c., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and BP p.l.c. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



