As natural gas prices have collapsed, Chesapeake Energy has been making enormous moves to get out from the effect of low natural gas prices. That's no easy feat for the second largest natural gas producer in the U.S.. To make the move, Chesapeake has been operating a drilling program that will average more than 100 rigs in 2012. And to fund this immense drilling program, Chesapeake has been selling off assets from the massive collection it got during the shale gas and shale oil land grabs over the past several years. Recently, Chesapeake announced almost $7 billion in asset sales this quarter, which included much of its Permian Basin acreage, some of its Utica shale holdings, and the rest of its midstream holdings. Watch the following video for the full analysis.
With the swelling of the global middle class, energy consumption will skyrocket over the next few decades, and long-term investors know that you want exposure to this space now. We've picked one incredible natural gas company that presents a rare "double-play" investment opportunity today. We're calling it The One Energy Stock You Must Own Before 2014, and you can uncover it today, totally free, in our premium research report. Click here to read more. 



Before you consider Royal Dutch Shell plc, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Royal Dutch Shell plc wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



When considering any stock for your portfolio, don't be swayed by just the positives. Examine its pros and cons, and decide whether it's possible upside outweighs its risks. Let's take a look at oil-and-gas explorer and developer McMoRan Exploration (NYSE: MMR) today and see why you might want to buy, sell, or hold it.
McMoRan Exploration is fairly small, with a market capitalization of about $2 billion. Founded in 1994 and based in New Orleans, it seeks and finds oil and natural gas, primarily in the Gulf Coast region of America, as well as in the Gulf of Mexico. As of last Dec. 31, its proven oil and natural gas reserves totaled 255.8 billion cubic feet equivalent.
Buy
A big reason to consider buying into the company is its industry. Despite the ongoing growth of alternative energy, oil and gas are likely to remain in demand for quite some time.
Another factor that appeals to some investors is this: McMoRan Exploration does a lot of business with Chevron (NYSE: CVX), and some speculate that Chevron may just buy the company outright one day. Such transactions typically are done at a premium to the going price of a stock, so shareholders can experience a nice bump. Still, the acquisition remains just speculation, and some buyouts don't offer much of a premium. Even if they do, when a smaller, faster-growing company is bought by a bigger, slower-growing one, shareholders can end up with less exciting growth prospects. It can be more powerful for a portfolio if a company succeeds and grows briskly on its own.
One exciting possibility for the company is its majority stake in a promising Davy Jones well in the Gulf of Mexico. The company cites great potential in the Davy Jones field, but has yet to realize it. It's true that it could run out of money before it succeeds there, but the company's balance sheet is stronger than those of many peers, so it's not in imminent danger.
Sell
One reason to consider selling the stock, or avoiding it, is the low price of natural gas, which has been putting pressure on many energy companies. A supply glut has kept prices down and motivated natural gas drillers to cut back on production, and the low price of gas has made oil less attractive as a fuel. (Some Fools see the glut shrinking soon, though.) Companies cutting back on production include ExxonMobil (NYSE: XOM) and EnCana (NYSE: ECA). Some other companies, such as Ultra Petroleum (NYSE: UPL), though, have locked in higher prices through hedging. They have an incentive to keep producing.
If you're looking for profitability in the companies in which you invest, look elsewhere. McMoRan has been reporting net losses, not gains, in recent years (mostly) -- though those losses have been shrinking, and net gains may be around the corner. Free cash flow has been growing in the wrong direction, though, to some degree because of increases in spending on property, plants, and equipment.
McMoRan's recent quarter was disappointing, with the company pointing to pipeline repairs, shipping delays, and declining gas sales.
Another negative for the company is its soaring share count. Companies will often raise money by issuing more shares, but doing so dilutes the value of the existing shares. (Imagine hearing that the pizza you'll be getting a slice of will be cut into 12 pieces, instead of the eight pieces you were expecting.) McMoRan's share count has gone from about 34 million in 2007 to roughly 161 million recently.
Hold (or hold off)
Given the reasons to buy or sell McMoRan Exploration, it's not unreasonable to decide to just hold off. You might want to wait for the company to post a string of profits, for example, or for the price of natural gas to rise significantly, or for the Davy Jones well to start delivering.
The verdict
I'm holding off on McMoRan Exploration for now. It may perform spectacularly in the coming years, but there are plenty of compelling stocks out there. Everyone's investment calculations are different, though. Do your own digging and see what you think.
Meanwhile, if you like energy stocks, we have another stock you should look at more closely. Read about it in The Motley Fool's special free report on the energy industry and its best prospects. It's free, but available only for a limited time.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



Earlier this year, the Fraser Institute disseminated its Global Petroleum survey to managers and executives of exploration and production companies around the world. The responses came in, and with them a wealth of information. Today I'll take a look at the survey's results for the five best places on Earth for oil and gas investments.
5. Manitoba
This is Canada's only province in the top five, surprising giving Alberta's prominent role in developing oil sands (that province ranked 21st in the survey). But Manitoba has a booming energy business as well, and as the survey results pointed out, the government has recently begun focusing on attracting investment.
Manitoba borders North Dakota and thus reaps the benefits of shale oil, just like its American neighbor. In 2011, the province produced a record 14.8 million barrels of oil, topping the previous record of 11.7 million from the year before. The largest producer in Manitoba is a privately held Canadian company called Tundra Oil & Gas, which generates about 40% of the province's oil production.
4. North Dakota
Production in North Dakota has been on a tear, and the state recently surpassed Alaska and California and now ranks second among all U.S. states in oil production. The most recent numbers show that oil production in the state reached 674,000 barrels per day in July. Oil production has increased since last April, and output has doubled since last May.
Most of the production is coming from the state's shale oil plays, specifically the Bakken Shale. Continental Resources (NYSE: CLR) is the top leaseholder in the Bakken and the top producing outfit in the Williston Basin. The company averages 100,000 barrels per day and has increased its reserves by 20%, which just outpaces the 19% growth of its share price this year.
3. Texas
Opportunity abounds in Texas. It's the sort of place where Kinder Morgan (NYSE: KMI), a pipeline company, can also be the state's second-largest oil producer.
Texas is the country's top oil-producing state, and there are an awful lot of energy companies headquartered in Houston. Aside from its powerful refining sector on the Gulf Coast, the state is also home to the Permian Basin and Eagle Ford, two of the hottest oil plays in the country right now.
Survey respondents were keen on Texas because of the lack of obstacles in its regulatory environment and its "good infrastructure and support services."
2. Mississippi
Mississippi is a bit of a sleeper on this list. Often playing second fiddle in the media to its Gulf Coast neighbors, the state actually has a substantial energy business.
Mississippi is part of the Gulf Coast's big refining business. In fact, Chevron's (NYSE: CVX) Pascagoula refinery is one of the top 10 largest refineries in the United States, processing 330,000 barrels of crude oil a day.
But perhaps most important in the eyes of E&Ps is that there have been new oil and gas deposits discovered in recent years that point to a high energy future for Mississippi.
1. Oklahoma
First overall, Oklahoma also ranked first in the survey's commercial environment index, meaning that respondents found it the best place to invest when considering six specific factors: fiscal terms, taxation regime, trade barriers, quality of infrastructure, labor availability, and corruption.
Oklahoma is home to the Mississippi Lime oil and gas play, a low-cost, high-return dream come true for E&Ps. The biggest player in the Lime right now is Sand Ridge Energy (NYSE: SD), which plans to drill 380 wells in the lime by the end of this year. Success begets success, and investors looking to cash in on Sand Ridge and Oklahoma should also consider Plains All American Pipeline (NYSE: PAA). The midstream outfit is in the process of constructing a 170-mile pipeline to carry Sand Ridge's oil from the Lime to the industry hub at Cushing, Okla.
Foolish takeaway
This is a global list, but the geopolitical risk is so low in North America, and the reward is so high, thast you can't blame E&P outfits for loving it here. Fools fixated on that No. 1 spot should consider our brand-new premium report on SandRidge. It looks at all sides of one of the most compelling energy plays right now, and you can grab your copy, which comes with free updates for 12 months.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



As hard-to-reach oil becomes a bigger part of the overall production mix, we see companies going offshore, to the onshore shales, and to the oil sands. The one thing these types of production have in common is that they're all unconventional.
As mergers and acquisitions continue at their brisk pace, a lot of the bigger players have been looking to increase their exposure to high-quality plays at a reasonable price. One of the areas where M&A has been strong has been in the Williston Basin, where companies have been trying to get access to the Bakken and Three Forks plays. Whiting Petroleum has been one name cited as a likely target. Watch the video for the full analysis
With the swelling of the global middle class, energy consumption will skyrocket over the next few decades, and long-term investors know that you want exposure to this space now. We've picked one incredible natural gas company that presents a rare "double-play" investment opportunity today. We're calling it The One Energy Stock You Must Own Before 2014, and you can uncover it today, totally free, in our premium research report. Click here to read more. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



