Typically, keeping track of all the major capital projects an integrated oil and gas company has going all at once is close to impossible. That has been less and less the case at Chevron (NYSE:CVX), as its development portfolio has become more and more concentrated on shale drilling in the Permian Basin. So far, it's been a rather successful strategy, as it has significantly increased the company's earnings and cash flow, even though fourth-quarter oil prices were on the decline throughout the quarter.
Let's look at what happened at Chevron this past quarter and what investors should make of this seemingly all-in-on-shale strategy. 
Check out the latest Chevron earnings call transcript.
DATA SOURCE: CHEVRON EARNINGS RELEASE. EPS= EARNINGS PER SHARE.
There's no other way to describe Chevron's recent earnings than solid and consistent. The company has been doing a lot of the same things over the past year to grow production and earnings at a steady rate. This past quarter, it was able to grow earnings from its upstream production largely from higher natural gas prices, especially in its international upstream business.
It's also worth pointing out that Chevron realized some large one-time tax benefits this time last year related to changes in corporate tax rates. Those gains of $3.33 billion and $1.16 billion for U.S. upstream and U.S. downstream, respectively, make the year-over-year comparisons look off. 
DATA SOURCE: CHEVRON. CHART BY AUTHOR.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
One of the issues Chevron ran into from 2014 to 2017 was that it had several large-scale projects under development that took several years to become productive assets. There was a time when it had tens of billions tied up in working capital for its Gorgon and Wheatstone LNG facilities. 
Since then, management has focused more of its spending on shorter development cycle projects, like shale. According to CEO Michael Wirth, the company is dedicating the lion's share of its capital spending to these shorter cycle projects:
Total C&E [capital & exploration] in 2018 was $20.1 billion. This included approximately $600 million of inorganic spend for which we don't budget, primarily related to bonus payments for offshore leases in Brazil and the Gulf of Mexico. The stacked bar depicts our organic C&E budget for 2019 of $20 billion.
Within this budget, the cash component is $13.7 billion, while the remaining $6.3 billion is expenditures by affiliates, primarily TCO [the Tengizchevroil oil field in Kazakhstan] and CPChem [ChevronPhillips Chemical].
In the 2019 budget, $3.6 billion was allocated to the Permian and another $1.6 billion is allocated to other shale and tight assets. We expect approximately 70% of our total 2019 spend to deliver cash within two years. Our current spend profile has significantly lower execution risk relative to the past.
You can read a full transcript of Chevron's conference call. 

CVX DATA BY YCHARTS
Chevron's earnings reports and business plans have been incredibly straightforward lately. The primary focus has been to maintain its dividend by cutting costs and getting the most out of its smaller suite of development projects. So far, it's been working, as management has been able to generate enough cash to cover its dividend obligations, pay down debt, and even buy back shares.
Based on the company's suite of major capital projects in the wings, it looks as if investors can expect more of the same in 2019. Growth will probably come from its shale drilling in the Permian, getting Wheatstone LNG up to full capacity, and getting first oil from its Big Foot offshore platform. Beyond that, the next major capital project isn't slated to have first oil until 2021.
Overall, Chevron has reported solid earnings and a plan that's generating cash to do what it wants right now. The question is how much longer it can sustain itself on this current track without investing in other growth projects. The answer to that is likely to come during its next security analyst meeting in March.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Oil is a volatile commodity prone to frequent and dramatic price swings. That was made clear in 2018, when oil plunged into a bear market in just a matter of weeks in the back half of the year. Despite near-term ups and downs, though, oil remains a vital source of energy. If you are looking at the sector, you should make sure to include at least one energy company in your portfolio that can ride the highs and lows in stride. That basically means you should buy either ExxonMobil Corporation (NYSE:XOM) or Chevron Corporation (NYSE:CVX), two U.S. energy giants with real staying power.
In 2012, ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP) enacted a major corporate overhaul. It spun off its downstream assets (which is what refining and chemicals businesses are called in industry lingo) so it could focus on its upstream (or drilling) business. This shift meant oil and natural gas prices were the main factor driving the company's top and bottom lines. When oil prices plummeted in mid-2014, going from over $100 a barrel to the $30 range, it wasn't long before ConocoPhillips was forced to cut its dividend.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The 66% dividend cut in 2016 was a painful hit for income investors. And while ConocoPhillips has been increasing its dividend lately, that dividend cut should always be in the back of your mind, because the next oil downturn could lead to a repeat. Neither Exxon nor Chevron cut their dividends during that rough spot for the oil market. 
One key reason why is that Exxon and Chevron have diversified operations encompassing both the upstream and downstream sides of the energy business. This is important because the refining and chemicals businesses they operate use oil and natural gas as key inputs. Low prices, then, are a net benefit because they lead to lower operating costs on the chemicals and refining side.
To put a number on that, Exxon's upstream earnings declined nearly 75% in 2015. But the company's downstream earnings roughly doubled, helping to offset the hit from low oil prices and limit the company's overall earnings decline to just 50% or so. And in 2014, 2015, and 2016, Exxon was able to raise its dividend. Chevon, which is a little more heavily weighted toward oil drilling, hiked its dividend at the end of 2014, held its dividend steady throughout 2015, and increased it again at the end of 2016.   
The inherent balance in these companies' business models is important, but there's another key factor to consider with Exxon and Chevron: rock-solid balance sheets. One of the best ways to see this is looking at financial debt to equity. Both Exxon and Chevron sit at the low end of their closest peers on this metric, which examines how much leverage a company uses. That's pretty much where this pair always sits when it comes to debt.

XOM FINANCIAL DEBT TO EQUITY (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS.
That gives Exxon and Chevron more leeway to use debt to maintain operations when energy prices inevitably fall. For example, going into the 2014 downturn, Chevron's long-term debt stood at around $20 billion, or about 12% of the capital structure. That's a very low number for any industry. To maintain its capital spending and support its dividend during that deep energy bear market, the company increased its leverage, upping long-term debt to around $35.2 billion by the end of 2016.   
That 75% increase in long-term debt only pushed Chevron's long-term debt to around 20% of the capital structure -- a still reasonable, perhaps even conservative number. With oil prices up off their lows, Chevron has started to reduce its debt again. The picture at Exxon, by the way, is roughly similar, only Exxon has historically been even more conservative on the debt front.   
The mixture of balanced business models and industry-leading balance sheets is what makes Exxon and Chevron so resilient to oil downturns. It helps explain why their streaks of annual dividend increases are at 36 years and 31 years, respectively. It's rare for any company in any industry to achieve a dividend record like that, let alone companies that operate in a highly volatile commodity sector.   

XOM DIVIDEND DATA BY YCHARTS.
Here's the thing: Even though ConocoPhillips' financial debt to equity is similarly low today, it doesn't have the portfolio balance provided by downstream operations. And while Italy's Eni S.p.A. has a diversified business, its heavy use of leverage makes it harder for the company to get through oil price swings without taking drastic actions (like cutting the dividend during the 2014 oil downturn). One or the other isn't really enough -- a company needs a balanced business and a strong balance sheet.
Check out the latest Exxon, Chevron, and ConocoPhillips earnings call transcripts.
The steep drop in oil in the back half of 2018 is a reminder that the energy industry is volatile. Unless you are attempting to time the ups and downs of oil and natural gas (not a great long-term investment tactic for most investors), you are better off sticking to a company with a balanced business model and a conservative balance sheet. On that score, two names stand out: ExxonMobil and Chevron. If you are interested in the energy sector, one of these two stocks should be in your portfolio.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


