Most people think investing is about money. That's obviously true, but it's not the whole story. Another, perhaps larger part of investing is about emotions -- yours and the emotions of others on Wall Street. In fact, if there's one key takeaway from pandemic-scarred 2020, it should probably be the importance of patience. 
Benjamin Graham, the man who helped to train Warren Buffett and is generally considered the father of financial analysis, used an interesting metaphor to describe Wall Street. Paraphrasing, he said that investing was like working with a partner named Mr. Market. Every day Mr. Market would either offer to buy your half of the business or sell you his based on the mood he was in at that given moment. Some days he was too excited and some days he was too pessimistic, presenting opportunities for you to buy and sell at desirable prices.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
A devoted value investor, it makes sense that Graham would think about investing in this way. But it really is a great mental image with regard to Wall Street, which tends to shift between emotional extremes. The early 2020 bear market is a prime example, as the coronavirus pandemic quickly pushed stocks lower only to have investors switch gears and drive stocks higher again. As 2020 draws to a close with the S&P 500 up 14% or so, it's almost hard to believe that the index was down around 30% at one point early in the year.
How rational was this seesaw year? The answer is likely to be not very rational at all when you look out over the long term. In fact, in many cases, investors would have been best off taking a deep breath and doing nothing. A willingness to sit tight and be patient paid off. 
Simply put, not every situation calls for an immediate reaction. For example, industrial giant 3M (NYSE:MMM) fell sharply during the bear market and has basically recovered all of the ground it lost. Its business is cyclical, so the fact that revenue and earnings are under pressure today, during a recession, is hardly surprising. And nothing dramatically changed at the historically innovation-driven company to suggest that the stock should have fallen more than 30% during the bear market. 

MMM DATA BY YCHARTS.
Buying during the depths of the downturn was probably a good call. Selling, however, would have been a mistake, given the quick recovery and the fact that nothing material changed at 3M. In this case, the key to holding tight was understanding what you own. To put some perspective on this, 3M's debt-to-equity ratio is 0.2 or so and it covers its trailing interest expenses 14 times over. Financial risk is modest at best. Moreover, it has an over six-decade-long streak of annual dividend increases under its belt. That's an example of the company's commitment to dividend investors, but also shows that it has deftly managed many negative economic cycles before. Yes, the COVID-19-led downturn was a reason to worry, but it was not worth panicking about -- assuming you had a good handle on 3M's business.   
But doing nothing doesn't work in every case, with some sectors still facing material headwinds. However, for those willing to be patient, that could actually be an opportunity now that the coronavirus storm clouds are slowly starting to clear. 
Energy stocks have been hit particularly hard by the pandemic thanks to the shutdowns being used to slow its spread. This led to a massive decline in energy demand and, as you would expect, steep drops in the prices for oil and natural gas. The thing is, this is really just an extreme example of the supply and demand cycle that has always existed in the energy patch. If history is any guide, supply will be curtailed (drillers are indeed pulling back) and demand will eventually pick up again (vaccines will be vital on this side of the equation). The end result is likely to be a restoration of balance and higher commodity prices.

CVX DEBT TO EQUITY RATIO DATA BY YCHARTS
That's not to suggest that there are no risks; highly leveraged drillers are already going bankrupt and getting acquired, helping to clear the oversupply situation. It's probably best for investors to stick to, or even switch to, large and financially strong companies in the sector, like Chevron (NYSE:CVX). This integrated energy giant's leverage is modest and its capital spending needs are relatively low. It should be able to muddle through this downturn in relative stride. In fact, having made its own acquisition, Chevron is likely to come out the other side of this cycle a stronger company than when it entered it. 
When you step back and try to learn from 2020, the lesson you should probably take to heart is to avoid being like Mr. Market. That means controlling your emotions enough to think long-term even when stocks are volatile. In short, you need to be patient. Industrial giant 3M is an example of this, since sitting pat and doing nothing was a good call for current shareholders. That said, the upheaval in the market is still presenting opportunities, which integrated oil major Chevron shows. In the end, you want to keep your cool so you can use Mr. Market's emotional whims to your advantage.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


The shift toward clean energy is leading some investors to question future demand for fossil fuels -- but contrarians might find that this is the time to invest in the sector. According to BP, 84% of the world's energy needs are still met by fossil fuels, which means that even if usage declines, demand will remain enormous. Clean energy might be the future, but fossil fuels are the present. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
Consider again that fossil fuels still provide 84% of the world's energy needs. All of the world's planes fly on fossil fuel. How long would it take to retire all the current planes and replace them with say, solar-powered planes? How much money would that cost an industry that's already decimated by the pandemic?
The vast majority of the world's cars are gasoline-powered. And even California, perhaps the most progressive state, has allotted a decade and a half before mandating that in 2035 all new car sales will have to be from zero-emission vehicles.
The cost of solar and wind power has declined by more than two-thirds in the past decade, making them an increasingly attractive energy source. But even aggressive proposals for the shuttering of coal plants forecast a rather lengthy 15-year transition period. And while coal seems to be on a slow decline, natural gas remains popular. In 2019, a third of all newly constructed U.S. power plants were powered by natural gas. 
In other words, even if the world wanted to abandon fossil fuels, doing so would take many decades. But in all likelihood, the whole world does not, in fact, want to move to clean energy. Consider this: The energy sector is responsible for 10% of the Canadian economy, as measured by gross domestic product (GDP.) In Saudi Arabia, that share is even higher; 50% of GDP comes from oil and gas. Russia is the world's second-largest natural gas producer, and the third-largest producer of oil. Do these countries want the world to move away from fossil fuels? Probably not.  
Structural demand for fossil fuels provides intermediate-term support. In the shorter run, the International Energy Agency estimates that the pandemic reduced global energy demand by 5%. While fallout from COVID-19 will likely be felt for several more years, effective vaccines should eventually lead to a resumption of "normal" work, leisure, and travel, which could lead to higher energy demand. And that increased demand would occur right at a time when supply is shrinking.
Last spring's price collapse and COVID-related demand declines resulted in 35 North American energy producers declaring bankruptcy in just the second and third quarters of 2020, which will reduce future supply. And the OPEC+ organization, which represents a combination OPEC and non-OPEC oil-producing nations (such as Russia), recently lowered its planned 2021 oil supply increase from 2 million barrels per day to 0.5 million barrels per day.  These future supply reductions will likely help support prices as demand recovers.
Even if the price of energy stocks stagnates in the near term, investors in some cases are getting paid well to wait. Beaten-down prices combined with steady dividend payouts have resulted in especially high dividend yields.
Between 2015 and the end of 2019, the dividend yield on Exxon (NYSE:XOM) fluctuated between 3.4% and 5%. Early in 2020, that yield jumped to 5.8%, and today it stands at 8.35%. Chevron currently yields (NYSE:CVX) 6.03%, after bouncing between 3.5% and 5% during the previous five years. Looking abroad, BP (NYSE:BP) is yielding 6.11%, and Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.A) yields a lower, but still attractive, 3.78%. 
Of course, if energy prices and profits remain low, there is no guarantee that companies will be able to maintain their current dividend payments. Over the past decade, Exxon has only covered 67% of its dividend payments through free cash flow. For Chevron, that number is 52%, and for BP 25%. Shell is the comparative "winner," but even there only 80% of dividends have been covered by free cash flow. The remainder of shareholder payouts have come from borrowing, asset sales, or reductions in cash reserves. And those figures only cover the period through 2019. The impact of the pandemic will only exacerbate the challenges these companies have faced in the past decade. 
But given the essential role energy, and energy companies, play in the global economy, it seems unlikely the sector will disappear anytime soon. If you have the opportunity to collect a few fat dividend checks from stocks in a sector with attractive short-term supply and demand characteristics, why wouldn't you do so?



Before you consider Royal Dutch Shell plc, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Royal Dutch Shell plc wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


