After an extended weekend and a week and half removed from the worst five-day trading session of the year, all three broad indexes are up, with the Dow Jones Industrials (INDEX: ^DJI) up 0.70% as of 12:00 p.m. EST. Good news from overseas seems to be spurring the rally after the markets received negative domestic news this morning.
First off this morning, the S&P/Case-Shiller report indicated that U.S. home prices dropped 2.6% compared to this time last year, making this the lowest they have been in 10 years. American consumer confidence dropped this past month to 64.9, considerably less than the expectation of 70. Consumers are pessimistic of the jobs report as well as fiscal worries and concerns over Europe. Both of these reports are mere noise today, as the more important economic news will be released later this week, culminated with the monthly jobs report this Friday.
Good news for energy and materials
The positive news of the day comes from overseas, where most European markets rose as polls in Greece show a pro-euro party leading in next month's elections. Also boosting the broad markets are encouraging signs that China will increase its growth rate. News reported last week stated the world's second-largest economy could grow at a slower rate than expected. However, these worries have subsided as Chinese banks have increased lending to increase spending and infrastructure project build-outs.
Positive signs that Greece will be staying in the euro as well as extended growth in China means manufacturing and technology will continue to expand, leading to a large consumption of energy. June oil futures are up 1.27% so far today, also spurring rallies in the energy and materials sector.
Dow component Chevron (NYSE: CVX) is up 1.32% despite the negative press once again from leaking wells. Caterpillar shares are surging today on the growth news from China, as the company is currently expanding heavily into emerging economies. Outside of the Dow, Chesapeake Energy (NYSE: CHK) is soaring today, up 5% as the Carl Icahn increased his shares of the company, now becoming the third-largest holder.
The hard-hit coal industry is also in action today, as Peabody Energy (NYSE: BTU) is trading up 4.65% today after Goldman Sachs upgraded the company to buy from neutral. However, the big news today once again belongs to Facebook (Nasdaq: FB), with a huge "un-like" coming from investors as the company reached its new low, trading down 6.71% today. Rumors are circulating that Facebook may be looking to expand into smartphones as the Internet company looks for ways to fix its revenue conundrum.
Takeaway
International news has provided the shot in the arm the broad markets have needed, but don't expect this rally to last. The market is still extremely volatile and will remain so until eurozone problems subside and an acceptable level of unemployment prevails. With so much uncertainty, now is an excellent time to look into remarkable companies that provide industry-leading dividends as well as plenty of growth potential. Click here to see a free report detailing nine rock-solid dividend stocks that could help out your portfolio's performance.



Before you consider Facebook, Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Facebook, Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



A lot of people have trouble getting back to work after a long holiday weekend, but the stock market certainly isn't showing any signs of a holiday hangover. Despite all sorts of concerning news, including a slip in consumer confidence, increasingly difficult conditions in Spain, and readings that home prices were unchanged in the U.S., the Dow Jones Industrials (INDEX: ^DJI) quickly jumped to more than a 150-point advance just before 10:45 a.m. EDT. All 30 Dow stocks were up in morning trade.
The biggest gainer was Caterpillar (NYSE: CAT), up more than 4%. As one of the most important Dow components, Caterpillar has a lot of influence on the average, and lately, its movements have been closely tied to economic conditions both in the U.S. and around the world. Although Europe's woes have dampened enthusiasm about the stock, Caterpillar's growth in the mining industry should prove to be instrumental to its long-term prospects.
Chevron (NYSE: CVX) also jumped strongly, rising almost 2%. Despite a blowout at a well in California, Chevron's shares have held up even with a recent drop in oil prices. With innovative practices such as its plans to use solar power to produce steam at a Saudi-Kuwaiti oilfield, Chevron is going beyond fossil fuel reliance to take advantage of diverse sources of energy.
Finally, Microsoft (Nasdaq: MSFT) was up almost 2%. Rumors that Facebook (Nasdaq: FB) may try to buy out Opera to establish a Facebook-linked browser might appear to threaten Microsoft's Internet Explorer's leadership position, but the rise of Google's Chrome has already put the writing on the wall for IE. Like it or not, Microsoft will have to go beyond its stable of existing products to grow in the future.
Holiday!
Even when the market's way up, you can still look for smart buys for your portfolio. You can find a few in The Motley Fool's special report on long-term investing, which features three promising stock picks for long-term investors, along with some tips on how to invest for your golden years. It's free, but don't wait -- get your report today while it's still available.



Before you consider Facebook, Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Facebook, Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



