Although we don't believe in timing the market or panicking over daily movements, we do like to keep an eye on market changes -- just in case they're material to our investing thesis.
Why are stocks down two days in a row after setting record high upon record high? Perhaps investors are disappointed that the Fed wasn't dovish enough in the statement from this week's monetary policy meeting -- the penultimate meeting of the year. Mind you, with the S&P 500 up 23% year to date in a halting economic recovery, it's not altogether surprising that the market might want to pause to catch its breath. The S&P 500, and the narrower, price-weighted Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI
), ended the day down 0.4% and 0.5% today, respectively.
Energy super-major ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
) was in the minority of Dow components that bucked the market's trend today on the back of its third-quarter results. ExxonMobil posted earnings per share of $1.79 on total revenues of $112.4 billion, both of which surpassed Wall Street's expectations for $1.77 and $107.4 billion, respectively.
Nevertheless, revenues fell 2% year-on-year, while net income registered an 18% drop, despite the fact that capital and exploration expenditures for the nine months through Sep. 30 have risen 19% over the prior year period.
As the Financial Times points out today, the combination of ExxonMobil's existing heft, and the strict discipline it adheres to in order to protect its stellar returns, makes it increasingly difficult to find projects that will power this corporate "supertanker" forward. Furthermore, the company is not heavily present in the deep waters of the Gulf of Mexico or in domestic shale oil, two of the best areas in terms of production prospects.
Exxon's difficulty in achieving growth has not gone unnoticed by investors; the company's shares have badly lagged those of more aggressive peers Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) and ConocoPhillips, as well as the broad market. The same is true over the trailing five- and 10-year periods:

XOM DATA BY YCHARTS
In truth, growth remains a challenge for all of the majors. Chevron reports its third-quarter earnings tomorrow morning: In its interim update for the quarter, issued at the beginning of the month, it said oil and gas production was ahead 2.2% year on year domestically, and 3.1% internationally. According to FactSet, analysts expect Chevron to post $2.69 in earnings per share for the third quarter -- flat relative to the third quarter of 2012.
One lever that ExxonMobil could still pull to please investors: raising its dividend. At 2.9%, Exxon's dividend yield is higher than that of the S&P 500, but falls short of Chevron's (3.3%), and ConocoPhillips' (3.7%).




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Although we don't believe in timing the market or panicking over daily movements, we do like to keep an eye on market changes -- just in case they're material to our investing thesis.
The stock market fell modestly Thursday morning as investors continued to assess whether the Federal Reserve's decision yesterday to maintain quantitative easing was good or bad for the bull market's future prospects. As of 12:15 p.m. EDT, the Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI
) were down five points. But as earnings season rolls on, oil giant Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) is next among the Dow 30 to report. After ExxonMobil's (NYSE:XOM
) results earlier today, investors will have high hopes for Chevron to do even better.
Chevron will release its results before the market opens tomorrow, with the company having issued its previous quarter's report at 8:30 a.m. EDT. It will follow up its release with a conference call scheduled to begin at 11 a.m. EDT.
Chevron already gave investors a hint of possible problems, with its interim report earlier this month revealing that it expects third-quarter earnings to fall compared to the second quarter. Just as Exxon reported earlier today, Chevron said it thought that results for its upstream operations, which include exploration and production activity, would improve slightly. However, Chevron expected significantly lower earnings from its downstream segment, which is also consistent with what Exxon reported today.
The key for Chevron, though, will be whether it can follow Exxon's lead in boosting production levels. Exxon's report included a 1.5% jump in oil-equivalent production volumes, with growth coming primarily from more-valuable oil and liquids production at the expense of declines from natural gas. By contrast, Chevron's interim report showed a much more balanced strategy, with total expected year-over-year production growth of 2.9% coming from a 4.2% gain in natural-gas production and a 2.2% rise in liquids.
Chevron's different approach to the energy market should give investors a broader picture of the industry when it reports tomorrow, and topping Exxon's growth could be seen by investors as validation of Chevron's long-term strategy. For the Dow, affirming a natural-gas-friendly approach to energy could bolster the many initiatives that companies are contemplating to take advantage of the cheap, clean-burning fuel around the world.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


