Happy Friday!
After a crazy week that included a massive storm which shut down the stock exchanges, an impressive post-storm rally, and a slew of economic reports and blue chip earnings releases, you'd be excused for scratching your head at the current direction of the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI
). Roughly halfway through the trading day, the index is down by 46 points, or 0.35%.
Data released this morning showed that domestic jobs growth accelerated last month, though the unemployment rate ticked up. According to the Labor Department, nonfarm payrolls improved by a seasonally adjusted 171,000 jobs in October. Economists surveyed by Bloomberg had anticipated an advance of 125,000. Meanwhile, the unemployment rate increased slightly to 7.9%, as more Americans entered the labor force.
Given the political season, it should be no surprise that the opposing candidates had conflicting interpretations of these figures. According to The Wall Street Journal, Mitt Romney said that: "Today's increase in the unemployment rate is a sad reminder that the economy is at a virtual standstill. The jobless rate is higher than it was when President Obama took office, and there are still 23 million Americans struggling for work."
Alternatively, a spokesman for President Obama noted that the report "provides further evidence that the U.S. economy is continuing to heal from the wounds inflicted by the worst downturn since the Great Depression."
In other news, shares in Dow component Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) are down today after the company reported its third-quarter earnings earlier this morning. The oil giant missed estimates on both the top and bottom lines. For the quarter, Chevron earned $2.69 a share on $58 billion in revenue. Analysts had predicted earnings of $2.83 a share on revenue of $63.9 billion. Moreover, like ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM
), which reported yesterday, both figures represented significant declines on a year-over-year basis.
Finally, with the election less than one week away, there are already predictions that a resolution will lead to a broad rally in the stock market. JPMorgan Chase's (NYSE:JPM
) famed investment banker Jimmy Lee was quoted by Bloomberg as predicting this, particularly if the election is followed by progress on the fiscal cliff. If so, banks like Lee's will undoubtedly be beneficiaries, as institutions such as Bank of America (NYSE:BAC
) are trading at some of the lowest valuations in the market today.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


One thing investors learn quickly is that good news doesn't necessarily translate into long-lasting gains for the financial markets. Despite a better-than-expected jobs report this morning that initially sent stock futures higher and led to a positive open for the stock market, the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI
) couldn't hold its gains and was down 55 points at 10:45 a.m. EDT. With the jobs report marking the last major economic release before next week's election, investors are undoubtedly turning to the uncertainty in the presidential race and related issues like the fiscal cliff as sources of mild pessimism.
Among big movers in the Dow, Travelers (NYSE:TRV
) again moved lower, falling by 2% as the company faces ever-increasing estimates of damage from Hurricane Sandy. With governors in the states most affected by the storm declaring that Sandy's winds were insufficient to qualify as a hurricane, deductibles that would have applied now won't, costing Travelers and its peers more in loss claims.
On the earnings front, Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) lost more than 2% on a 33% drop in net income during the third quarter. With lower oil and gas prices and falling production contributing to a $5.6 billion drop in quarterly revenue from the year-ago period, Chevron faces the continuing threat of idled production off the coast of Brazil, where oil spills have prompted government investigations. The news follows ExxonMobil's (NYSE:XOM
) own lackluster earnings report, which raised similar concerns.
Outside the Dow, priceline.com (NASDAQ:BKNG
) saw its stock price climb more than $60 per share due to a strong earnings report. A 27% rise in net income was positive, but even more encouraging were signs that Europe's economy may finally be stabilizing. That would bode well not just for the online travel portal, but for businesses generally.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


Chevron (NYSE: CVX) reported earnings on Nov. 2. Here are the numbers you need to know.
The 10-second takeaway
For the quarter ended Sep. 30 (Q3), Chevron missed estimates on revenues and whiffed on earnings per share.
Compared to the prior-year quarter, revenue contracted and GAAP earnings per share shrank significantly.
Margins shrank across the board.
Revenue details
Chevron chalked up revenue of $55.66 billion. The four analysts polled by S&P Capital IQ foresaw net sales of $57.04 billion on the same basis. GAAP reported sales were 4.2% lower than the prior-year quarter's $59.29 billion.
Source: S&P Capital IQ. Quarterly periods. Dollar amounts in millions. Non-GAAP figures may vary to maintain comparability with estimates.
EPS details
EPS came in at $2.37. The 16 earnings estimates compiled by S&P Capital IQ predicted $2.89 per share. GAAP EPS of $2.69 for Q3 were 31% lower than the prior-year quarter's $3.92 per share.
Source: S&P Capital IQ. Quarterly periods. Non-GAAP figures may vary to maintain comparability with estimates.
Margin details
For the quarter, gross margin was 27.7%, 310 basis points worse than the prior-year quarter. Operating margin was 15.3%, 190 basis points worse than the prior-year quarter. Net margin was 9.3%, 390 basis points worse than the prior-year quarter.
Looking ahead
Next quarter's average estimate for revenue is $59.61 billion. On the bottom line, the average EPS estimate is $3.13.
Next year's average estimate for revenue is $246.07 billion. The average EPS estimate is $12.81.
Investor sentiment
The stock has a five-star rating (out of five) at Motley Fool CAPS, with 4,033 members out of 4,196 rating the stock outperform, and 163 members rating it underperform. Among 984 CAPS All-Star picks (recommendations by the highest-ranked CAPS members), 963 give Chevron a green thumbs-up, and 21 give it a red thumbs-down.
Of Wall Street recommendations tracked by S&P Capital IQ, the average opinion on Chevron is outperform, with an average price target of $124.86.
Are you missing a major story in the energy space? Read about "One Stock to Own Before Nat Gas Act 2011 Becomes Law." Click here for instant access to this free report.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



