There has been a lot of talk about how shale drilling is the game-changing energy event for both the U.S. and the world. But this train of thought does injustice to another fast-moving oil space: offshore drilling. In the past decade, more than 41% of all newly discovered oil has been found in ultra-deepwater regions, outpacing both onshore and near-shore finds. Also, with big finds in areas like the Gulf of Mexico, offshore Brazil, and Africa, there is still a lot of development that will help to drive the industry. 
Of course, exploration of ultra-deepwater can be both expensive and risky. Just ask a company like Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.A
), which has dumped more than $5 billion into looking for oil off the shores of Alaska only to come up with nothing. Rather than worrying about whether oil gets found, investors should look at the companies, such as rig companies, that make money offshore regardless of whether oil is found. Rig fleets are set to explode worldwide in the next couple of years, and some players are getting ready. Tune into the video below where Fool contributor Tyler Crowe looks at a couple of rig companies gearing up for the offshore boom.


Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


U.S. stock markets were closed yesterday to observe the Fourth of July holiday, but when they opened this morning, traders were in a buying mood. The addition of 195,000 jobs to the economy in June won't wow anyone, but it was better than expected and shows that the labor market is slowly growing. Investors cheered the news, and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI
) is up 0.72% today, while the S&P 500 (SNPINDEX:^GSPC
) has gained 0.69%.  
Banking stocks are the biggest beneficiaries today, because this data will add to speculation that the Federal Reserve will slow its $85 billion-per-month bond-buying program, taking away the economy's crutch. The Fed's program has aimed to keep long-term interest rates low, and they will likely continue to rise now that the economy appears to be strong. There's no indication that short-term rates will rise, though, and that means banks can borrow at low short-term rates while borrowing at higher long-term rates, boosting profits.
JPMorgan Chase (NYSE:JPM
) is up 1.9% today as investors speculate that interest rate spreads will rise and defaults will fall for the giant bank. But American Express (NYSE:AXP
) is also up 2% because a stronger economy means fewer defaults on its credit cards, and the higher long-term interest rates could help boost profits as well. In short, it's good to be a bank investor today.
The other big mover is oil, which has jumped nearly $2 to pass $103 for the first time since early last year. A stronger economy should mean more demand for oil, which is good news for oil producers because demand has actually been dropping since 2005 in the U.S.
Chevron (NYSE:CVX
) is the big beneficiary on the Dow today, climbing 0.9%. The company doesn't rely on the price of oil to make a profit, but a higher price can make exploration more lucrative.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


