With the market near all-time highs and the current economic expansion ranking as one of the longest in recorded history, it's not as easy as you might hope to find a 3% yield. But if you are willing to dig a little, you can do it. Here are two that come from opposite sides of the global debate about carbon: Chevron Corporation (NYSE:CVX) and TerraForm Power (NASDAQ:TERP). If you take a little time to understand the story here, you might actually find you like both these high-yield stocks.
Try to remember back to the last time you suffered through a blackout. It was probably related to severe weather and made you miserable. No light, possibly no heat, and if it lasted long enough you may have had to toss out all the food in your refrigerator. Even worse than all of that, you may not have been able to access the internet! That's actually not a joke, as without the internet many people can't do their jobs. That's what life is like without energy. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
That said, big changes are taking shape in the way the world creates and uses energy. For example, there is a shift toward clean power and away from carbon-based fuels. It's an important transition that will be decades in the making because it will simply take time to install all the needed infrastructure. While that's going on, the world will continue to need access to its old fuel sources. 
As an investor, you shouldn't ignore either side of this equation. There's a huge growth opportunity in renewable power, like the kind TerraForm Power generates. And there's still years and years of demand left to support carbon fuels, like oil and natural gas, which are the core of Chevron's business. Dividend investors might find that owning both is the best way to deal with this transition.
Chevron offers investors a sizable 4% dividend yield backed by 32 years of annual dividend increases. The prices of oil and natural gas are the two biggest factors in determining this global energy giant's top- and bottom-line results. That's been bad lately, because there's a global glut of oil and gas due to expanded drilling in the United States. This has caused the prices of both fuels to linger in a relatively weak range. Chevron's third-quarter earnings fell roughly 35% because of weak energy prices. And shortly after the quarter ended, the company announced it would be writing down the value of its assets by as much as $11 billion in the fourth quarter. Historically low natural gas prices were a key factor in that decision.    
But Chevron is built to deal with the ups and downs of the energy sector. For example, its financial debt-to-equity ratio was around 0.15 times based on its third-quarter balance sheet. That's low for any company and suggests strongly that Chevron will, at worst, muddle through the current industry headwinds. Meanwhile, investments the oil giant made in previous years are continuing to pay off, allowing it to increase production (around 3% to 4% a year over the near term) while spending relatively less on capital investments than its peers. 
And since oil and natural gas are commodities, it's highly likely that supply and demand will even out over time. That's already starting to happen, with many U.S. onshore drillers starting to pull back and the OPEC oil group continuing to talk about production cuts. As these efforts progress, oil and gas prices are likely to solidify and perhaps even strengthen. Stronger energy prices would be a boon for Chevron's results. The key being that even though carbon is on the outs, the world still can't get along without oil and natural gas.    
If you are big on the environmental, social, and governance (ESG) investing approach, maybe Chevron won't work for you. But if you believe that giving the world what it wants, and still needs, is a good thing, then Chevron and its 4% yield might just fit in your portfolio despite its dirty reputation. 
The other side of the carbon equation is typified by companies like TerraForm Power. This company owns solar and wind power assets, largely selling the energy they generate under long-term contracts (the average remaining length of its contracts is about 13 years). It's a fairly stable business, as it stands today, offering a hefty 5.3% dividend yield. But there's a bit of a backstory that's worth understanding.   
In 2017 Brookfield Asset Management (NYSE:BAM) stepped in and bought a controlling stake in TerraForm Power. This provided TerraForm a lifeline, because before that it had gone on a debt-fueled acquisition binge that didn't end particularly well. Brookfield, with over 100 years of experience managing infrastructure assets, came in and refocused TerraForm Power's approach. It is now, like Brookfield, centered on finding out-of-favor assets, operating what it owns at high levels, and expanding internally in an accretive way (for example, it is installing larger turbine blades on some of its wind farms to increase the productivity of these assets). It has also worked to strengthen its balance sheet. Having Brookfield as a backstop is a major advantage for TerraForm, allowing it to compete with larger peers while benefiting from Brookfield's sage guidance. This has already proven invaluable, but will continue to be important because renewable power remains a relatively small and fast-growing niche in the overall energy landscape. There are likely to be more high-yield names that end up falling flat because they overextend themselves, noting that TerraForm itself ended up cutting its dividend as it worked to get back on track. The risk that TerraForm Power will do that (again) is greatly diminished today. 

CVX DIVIDEND YIELD (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS
In fact, now that it's turned things around, a key goal for TerraForm Power is to increase its dividend by around 5% to 8% a year. You get not only a generous yield but dividend growth, too. And while some investors might worry that the company is currently paying out most of its cash available for distributions as, well, distributions, the goal is to get that down to 80% to 85%. And the current payout ratio of around 100% is actually an improvement, so the trend is going in the right direction (proving again that Brookfield has TerraForm Power on the right track).   
For investors interested in clean energy, this high-yield name is worth a closer look as it continues to become a better and better company. That, in turn, will help it navigate, with the help of an experienced parent, a still-emerging industry space.
"Oil is bad and clean energy is good" is too simple a thought process. Chevron is focused on dirty oil and natural gas and is dealing with an industry malaise, but the world still needs what it produces, and it has the financial strength to survive the current weak patch in energy. You can collect a 4% yield while you wait for supply and demand to balance out. Meanwhile, clean energy player TerraForm Power offers a desirable 5.3% yield backed by an increasingly solid business. But the history here shows that renewable power isn't a slam dunk investmentwise. You need to be cautious in the renewable power space because the global shift toward clean energy is still in its early days. Which is why you might want to own both Chevron and TerraForm Power, giving your portfolio exposure to the old and the new...and two fat yields.



Before you consider Chevron Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chevron Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


A new year is on the way. With it comes plenty of excitement... and perhaps some nervousness for investors. No one knows what the stock market will do in 2020. After the longest bull run ever and the inherent uncertainty in a presidential election year, investors can't be blamed for being at least a little apprehensive -- especially investors who rely on income generated by the stocks they own.
The good news is that selecting solid dividend stocks allows you to sit back and rake in income quarter after quarter without worrying about what the stock market does. But which stocks are smart picks? Here are 20 high-yield dividend stocks you can buy in 2020, listed in alphabetical order.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
AbbVie (NYSE:ABBV) offers a dividend that yields nearly 5.3%. The big drugmaker recently increased its dividend by 10.3% and has grown the dividend by a whopping 195% since being spun off from Abbott Labs in 2013. Although AbbVie faces headwinds for its top-selling drug Humira, the rest of its lineup plus its pending acquisition of Allergan should put the company in great shape to keep the dividends flowing.
Telecommunications giant AT&T's (NYSE:T) dividend currently yields 5.4%. The company is a Dividend Aristocrat and boasts 36 consecutive years of dividend increases. AT&T's entertainment business is still under heavy pressure, but its wireless business should remain strong. 
Brookfield Infrastructure Partners (NYSE:BIP) pays a dividend with a yield just shy of 4%. The company's infrastructure assets, including cell towers, natural gas pipelines, ports, and toll roads, provide a steady revenue stream. Brookfield Infrastructure expects to grow organically by between 6% and 9% in 2020 as it adds new infrastructure assets to its portfolio.
Brookfield Renewable Partners (NYSE:BEP) is Brookfield Infrastructure's sibling, with both companies controlled by general partner Brookfield Asset Management. Brookfield Renewable, as its name indicates, focuses primarily on renewable energy assets including hydroelectric, wind, and solar power facilities. Its dividend currently yields close to 4.5%.
2019 hasn't been a great year for the energy sector. But Chevron (NYSE:CVX) has performed better than most energy stocks. The company's strong balance sheet and relatively low cash-flow break even point of $51 per barrel of oil puts the company in a position to weather a tough oil market and to perform really well in a good market. Chevron's dividend currently yields nearly 4%. Another dividend increase in 2020 seems likely.
Duke Energy (NYSE:DUK) offers a dividend that yields nearly 4.2%. As a utility that provides must-have electric and gas power to customers, the company can count on steady earnings. And that translates to steady dividends, making Duke a dividend stock that's ideal for retirees in 2020 and beyond.
Enbridge (NYSE:ENB) is another company that enjoys steady earnings thanks to its oil and gas pipelines. The company's dividend yield currently stands north of 6.3%. Enbridge seems likely to be able to boost its dividend by 10% in 2020.
Enterprise Products Partners (NYSE:EPD) ranks as one of the top players in the midstream oil and gas market. The company offers a mouthwatering dividend yield of 6.4%. Enterprise also has several new projects on the way that should boost its growth prospects over the next few years.
There aren't many biotechs that have dividend programs, but Gilead Sciences (NASDAQ:GILD) is a notable exception. Gilead's dividend currently yields over 3.8%. Its strong HIV franchise is the biotech's anchor, but Gilead hopes to soon expand into immunology by winning FDA approval for its rheumatoid arthritis drug filgotinib next year.
IBM (NYSE:IBM) has been a dividend investors' favorite for a long time. It still should be, with its dividend yielding nearly 4.8%. The technology company could also enjoy rising sales in 2020 thanks to its acquisition of Red Hat earlier this year and the launch of its new z15 mainframe system.
If you're looking for a way to profit from the cannabis boom, Innovative Industrial Properties (NYSE:IIPR) should be near the top of the list. The cannabis-focused real estate investment trust (REIT) is growing like a weed (pardon the pun). It also offers a fast-growing dividend that currently yields 5.4%.
Medical Properties Trust (NYSE:MPW) is a REIT that focuses on healthcare. The company owns and leases healthcare properties, primarily acute care hospitals. Its dividend currently yields 5.2%. Medical Properties Trust has steadily increased its dividend payout over the last five years. 
ONEOK (NYSE:OKE), like Enterprise Products Partners, operates in the midstream energy market. Its stock has outperformed most of its peers in 2019. Despite the big run-up in its share price, ONEOK's dividend yield remains high at just under 5%. The company should fare well in 2020 also, with several projects coming online that could fuel earnings growth.
Pfizer's (NYSE:PFE) dividend yields over 3.9% right now, but it's likely to drop soon. So why did the big pharma stock make the list of dividend stocks to buy for 2020? The reason Pfizer's dividend is going to decline is that the company is spinning off and merging its Upjohn unit with Mylan, forming a new entity to be named Viatris. The good news for Pfizer shareholders is that between their positions in Pfizer and Viatris, the overall dividend should be roughly the same. The deal also puts Pfizer on a stronger growth path by shedding its older drugs with declining sales.
One thing isn't likely to change in 2020: Americans have too much stuff and need a place to store that stuff. Public Storage (NYSE:PSA) offers a solution to that problem as the nation's largest self-storage provider. The company also offers a solution to investors looking for reliable income with its dividend yield of 3.9%.
Southern Company (NYSE:SO) ranks as one of the largest utilities in the U.S. It's also one of the most attractive high-yield dividend stocks with its dividend currently yielding nearly 3.9%. Even better, Southern Company should be able to boost its dividend modestly in 2020 and in subsequent years.
Warren Buffett really likes Store Capital (NYSE:STOR), the only REIT in Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway holdings. Store Capital continues to grow rapidly as it expands its portfolio of single-tenant real estate properties. That growth could translate to even higher dividends from the company, making Store Capital's current dividend yield of nearly 3.8% even more attractive.
Like fellow telecom leader AT&T, Verizon Communications (NYSE:VZ) faces some headwinds. However, also like AT&T, Verizon offers a terrific dividend, which currently yields 4%. The company is a Dividend Aristocrat that places a high priority on dividend hikes each year. In addition, Verizon's investments in building a high-speed 5G wireless network should pay off over the long run.
Wells Fargo's (NYSE:WFC) stock performance has lagged behind many of its peers in the financial services sector mainly because of the aftermath of the company's scandals that made headlines beginning in 2016. But those scandals didn't impact Wells Fargo's dividend program. The financial giant's dividend currently yields nearly 3.8%, and its future appears to be brighter now that a new CEO is in place.
Rounding out our 20 high-yield dividend stocks to buy in 2020 is Welltower (NYSE:WELL). The healthcare REIT offers a dividend yield of 4.5%. With its focus on private-pay senior housing properties, Welltower should be able to count on a steady revenue stream that allows it to keep the dividends flowing well into the future.
All 20 of these stocks should provide great income for investors in 2020 and beyond. Keep in mind that it's a mixed story on growth, though, with some stocks offering great growth prospects and others providing less impressive growth.



Before you consider International Business Machines Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and International Business Machines Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


