


Enjoy these three reads to feed your curiosity in business, investing, and life.
"Wall Street is 'the most manipulated scam and corrupt marketplace on earth right now.'"
An oldie but a goodie, this story was originally published on Wired.com in 2000. Remember the day-trading craze of the late 1990s? If that question made you cringe, then this story may bring back some ugly memories. As the S&P and Dow soldier higher, now is a good time to remember that investing is not trading; investing is buying ownership in companies you believe in for the long term. 
He views the competition among brokerage firms, market makers, and the new electronic trading system merely as a staged showbiz feud, and he pictures the Nasdaq market as an evil partnership: The online brokerages lure new herds of sheep into the game and collect the admission fees while the market makers do the shearing. "Right now," Anthony says, "people just get wild hairs up their ass, and all of a sudden a whole sector will move and there is no rhyme or reason to it. Take online banking. Net banks are at 20 or 30 bucks and then they shoot up to 200 because everybody is talking about how people will do more banking online, and over a four-month period they drop back down to 20 bucks. The more volatile the market, the more risk associated with it, and undoubtedly the more losers. You have the public versus the professional, and the public is going to lose in the end."
"Netflix's War on Mass Culture"
In this long form article from the New Republic, we are all challenged -- as consumers and as investors -- to understand just how significant an impact Netflix (NASDAQ:NFLX) could have on the media business, on entertainment content, and on human behavior. 
Pursuing a strategy that runs counter to many of Hollywood's most deep-seated hierarchies and norms, Netflix seeks nothing less than to reprogram Americans themselves. What will happen to our mass culture if it succeeds?
Vladimir Nabokov believed that humanity's highest yearning ought to be to leave behind any desire to be up-to-date, to be unconcerned with what is happening now. As he put it in his notes to Pale Fire: "Time without consciousness -- lower animal world; time with consciousness -- man; consciousness without time -- some still higher state."
The business of entertainment has not generally shared Nabokov's view. It values timeliness above all, creating a hierarchy so fundamental that it resembles natural law: New is better than old, live trumps prerecorded, original episodes always beat reruns.
China's Achilles' heel?
Thanks to the revolution in shale gas technology, the U.S. is on the verge of becoming the world's largest non-OPEC producer of crude oil. Warren Buffett is investing billions in ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP). The business of oil is on the up and up here in the U.S. of A.
But in China, with every barrel of increasing demand for oil and gas, the country becomes that much more dependent on foreign supplies. Could this be the Achilles' heel for the world's second largest economy? From WorldCrunch.com: 
Another report pointed out that the difference between daily oil consumption and production in the U.S. has shrunk to 624 barrels in September. That same figure is 630 for China making it now the world's biggest net crude oil importer.
China's oil import dependency has risen from 32% at the beginning of this century to 57% last year. In the past few years, Chinese car ownership has exploded while China's oil production has grown only slightly.
A few days ago, China's National Energy Administration incorporated shale gas for the first time as a strategic and emerging industry. The Chinese government is expected to increase financial support to this industry by reducing fees and royalties and adding new tax breaks to shale gas mining firms.



Before you consider Netflix, Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Netflix, Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


By way of 13F SEC filings, retail investors can find out which famous investors, like Berkshire Hathaway (NYSE:BRK.B) and Markel (NYSE:MKL), own shares of stocks like Bank of America (NYSE:BAC), AIG (NYSE:AIG), or ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM). While this information can be useful, investors shouldn't blindly follow these professional money managers.
In this segment of The Motley Fool's financials-focused show, Where the Money Is, financial-sector analysts Matt Koppenheffer and David Hanson tell viewers about five funds they think can provide some interesting insights. The guys highlight Bruce Berkowitz's Fairholme Capital Management's large stakes in Bank of America and AIG and discuss Warren Buffett's ExxonMobil purchase. Like Berkshire Hathaway, insurer Markel's 13F filing also provides some great lessons on long-term investing.



Before you consider Bank of America Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Bank of America Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Full transcript below.

Matt Koppenheffer: Moving on to our focus for today, we're sort of at the end of earnings season, and that also means that we're basically at the end of 13F reporting season.
David Hanson: We're almost to the fourth quarter of earnings season. It turns over so fast -- one more month.
Koppenheffer: These quarters grow up so quickly.
For those that aren't familiar with 13F reporting season, all the financial companies that own stocks, so we're thinking about mutual funds, thinking about hedge funds, and then companies like Berkshire Hathaway and Markel, that own a lot of securities -- I guess we could say insurance companies; both of those are insurance companies -- that own securities, they have to report in these 13F filings to the SEC, letting the SEC and letting investors know, what are the stocks that they own.
This is a great time for investors to tune into these and see what the talented investors out there are doing; not necessarily to just go and copy what a Tom Gayner at Markel is doing, or what Buffett's doing over at Berkshire, but to tune in. To see what they're doing, and then maybe do some more analysis on your own and figure out if that's a good idea for your own portfolio.
I know you've got a few that you were looking at. I've got a few here that I was looking at, so maybe we'll do a little back-and-forth, here.
I'll start out with Berkshire because we can't not cover Berkshire. I'm sure that most Buffett fans have already heard what Berkshire's done this quarter, but it added a position in ExxonMobil. This has been a position that the company's been building for a while. This is a Buffett position. They don't really say specifically what's a Buffett position and not, but this is a Buffett position.
ExxonMobil, on the other side of the coin, eliminated stock in ConocoPhillips. This is an interesting kind of pairs trade if you're looking at the two -- sell ConocoPhillips, buy ExxonMobil.
Hanson: Look at you, "pairs trade."
Koppenheffer: Pairs, yeah. You didn't know that I was a short-term trader.
Hanson: Such a trader.
Koppenheffer: Yeah, I know. CNBC's going to be calling me for Fast Money now.
Hanson: I like it.
Koppenheffer: Also added to the very large position in DaVita. This is not a Buffett position, almost assuredly. Most likely this was from Ted Weschler. This was a very large position in his hedge fund before he came over to work at Berkshire. Also sold a bunch of stock in Tesco, the overseas grocery giant.
Hanson: There you go. One of the ones that I like to take a look at -- there's not a ton of quarterly moves in this one -- and that's Fairholme Capital Management. That's Bruce Berkowitz. It's really just more interesting to see how concentrated this portfolio is -- 65% of the portfolio in AIG and Bank of America -- so just a very unique perspective there.
This isn't, maybe, one to go in, like you said, and blindly follow, and say, "Oh, he's doing that. I'm going to put 65% of my portfolio in there," but he's got a very interesting strategy in terms of how he sees value, so I think it's an interesting one to pull up and see where does his portfolio sit, what is he thinking about the market right now? That's one that's always on my list.
Koppenheffer: Well, Fairholme was the number two on my list. It makes sense that it's on our radar because of the big positions there. During the quarter, added a whole bunch more Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac preferred shares -- preferred shares. I know there was some talk early on that, when Berkowitz was buying the preferred shares of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, that he also bought some common shares.
He did, and then sold them. This is, as far as I could tell, almost exclusively now a bet on the preferred shares of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, and we actually saw the proposal that Berkowitz made to roll those over into a new company. Also added some more Sears Holdings, sold a little bit of AIG and Bank of America; maybe not too surprising, given the overwriting in there. Maybe making some room for that big Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac preferred play.
Hanson: My next one?
Koppenheffer: Yeah, go for it. I'm not stopping you.
Hanson: You mentioned it when we kicked off, and that's Markel and Tom Gayner, who's managing that portfolio over there. This is an interesting one, contrasted to Fairholme. It's much more diversified; a lot of stocks in this portfolio.
There is some concentration at the top. This is total here -- 20% is in Berkshire, Brookfield Asset Management, and Fairfax Financial Holdings -- so there's some concentration in there, but it's a little bit different because all three of those companies are diversified in their own right.
We talk about Berkshire Hathaway, it's essentially an index fund, kind of. It spans multiple areas of the economy itself.
Koppenheffer: Right, or at least a mutual fund.
Hanson: So, 20% of the Markel portfolio in there is in those three holdings, but those are very diversified as well. Gayner, a very interesting one. He's a value guy, but he's also not afraid to invest in some growth companies. He's not a cigarette-butt, or a cigar-butt type investor.
Koppenheffer: Or cigarette...
Hanson: Yeah.
Koppenheffer: He's not picking things up off the street...
Hanson: Nobody likes to do that.
Koppenheffer: Nobody does. It's gross.
Hanson: I don't know if he would brand himself that, but he's a little bit of a Foolish investor, so it'll be interesting to see what he's holding. Other than Berkshire Hathaway, his next biggest holding is CarMax, so maybe just one to look into, and read up more.
Koppenheffer: A lot of buybacks there at CarMax. A lot of buybacks. Big, big into the buybacks.
My final one, this is Mohnish Pabrai, his funds. Not much to report here; no changes in the portfolio. That's not too surprising, if you're familiar with Mohnish Pabrai. Again, a very concentrated portfolio here; even more concentrated, maybe, than Fairholme. He just doesn't do a lot of trading. Picks his positions and holds them, looks for big movements.
Among the top holdings, this goes to you and me; apparently either Pabrai has been listening to our show, or maybe we've been tele...
Hanson: Communicating?
Koppenheffer: Telecommunicating. I was struggling with that word. I don't even know if that's the right word.
Hanson: It's probably not.
Koppenheffer: We've got some Star Trek thing going on with Mohnish Pabrai. Bank of America, Citigroup, and Goldman Sachs all among Pabrai's top holdings.
Hanson: All right. My last one, I'll just say it quick, is Baupost Group, Seth Klarman.
Koppenheffer: Oh, good one.
Hanson: The guy's a genius, so one to put on your radar. There you go.
Koppenheffer: That's all you have to say?
Hanson: That's all I have to say.
Also a very concentrated portfolio at the top there, so one to check out. You can find these on SEC's website, but there's also a website that's pretty easy to navigate. It's called Whalewisdom.com. It's another easy one to just go in and check some stuff out. There you go.
Koppenheffer: Thanks for that enlightening report on Seth Klarman.
Hanson: You're welcome.
