There are many, many safer sectors to invest in right now than the oil industry. Yes, the entire stock market is in turmoil due to coronavirus concerns, but companies in this sector are dealing with an oil price collapse on top of the sudden drop in demand for fuel caused by travel restrictions. Oil companies have been slashing dividends right and left, and at least one (Whiting Petroleum) has filed for bankruptcy. 
With oil prices so low, independent exploration and production companies (E&Ps) are going to have a tough time, so investing in them right now is not recommended. Oilfield services companies and rig operators are also going to feel the pinch of decreased demand, as numerous producers have announced cuts to their capital budgets. So they're not good candidates either.
If you're really committed to investing in the oil industry right now, your best bet is to go for the strongest dividend-paying companies out there, which have a better chance of weathering the storm intact and rewarding you for your patience into the bargain. That's why this month, I'm recommending Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.A)(NYSE:RDS.B), ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), and Phillips 66 (NYSE:PSX). Here's why these are the top picks in the sector for April.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Like the rest of the oil industry, integrated oil major Royal Dutch Shell saw its stock fall in early March when the oil price war between Saudi Arabia and Russia resulted in both countries vowing to flood the global energy market with cheap crude. Oil prices had been barely hovering above $50/barrel, but the news essentially cut those prices in half, dragging down Shell's shares along with everyone else's in the industry.
There's no way Shell is going to outperform with oil prices this low. And unlike the last oil price downturn in 2014, refined products like petrochemicals and gasoline are also low thanks to oversupply. So Shell won't be able to lean as heavily on its downstream (refining and marketing) business as it did in the past.
However, one thing Shell does still have going for it is its best-in-class dividend, which has been a top yielder among the oil majors for the last five years, and is currently yielding more than 10%. And Shell is committed to maintaining that dividend, recently announcing it will cut its 2020 capital spending by at least 20% and suspend its share buyback program to help preserve cash to maintain its payout.
Also working in Shell's favor are its rock-solid balance sheet, high credit rating, and shareholder-friendly management team. Shell looks like a safe bet to continue paying its full dividend until oil prices recover. 
For the strongest companies in the oil industry, it's all about keeping the proverbial lights on while they wait for a recovery. ExxonMobil, a company renowned for the strength of its balance sheet, is uniquely positioned to do just that.
Exxon's current dividend yield of 8.4% may not be as high as its Big Oil peer Shell's, but it's near March's record high for the company. Better yet, ExxonMobil is a dividend aristocrat, having upped its payout every year for the last 37 years. That's a streak that the company's management definitely wants to continue. 
The company just offered major reassurance to the market that its dividend was secure: it rolled out a 30% cut in 2020 capital spending and an additional 15% in operational spending. Like Shell, it plans to use the money it saves to continue paying its dividend. Also like Shell, it has an excellent credit rating in case it needs to tap the capital markets to help it weather the current storm. 
If integrated oil majors aren't your cup of (Texas) tea, you might consider an investment in a strong oil refiner like Phillips 66. The company doesn't produce oil, so it's somewhat insulated from crude oil price swings, but it does have a diversified portfolio, including its Phillips 66, Conoco, and 76 branded filling stations, a refinery network, and even exposure to pipelines through its master limited partnership (MLP) Phillips 66 Partners.
Under ordinary circumstances, low crude prices would be good for Phillips 66, because it could earn higher margins from its refining operations and increase traffic to its filling stations due to lower gas prices. These, unfortunately, are not ordinary circumstances.
Thanks to global travel and production shutdowns caused by coronavirus concerns, demand for refined products like fuel and petrochemicals has collapsed. That's made an existing oversupply problem even worse, and now refiners like Phillips 66 are stuck waiting for demand to increase again. Luckily, Phillips 66 has $1.6 billion in cash on its books and a consistent track record of cash generation to help it fund its dividend, which is currently yielding 6.1%.
Unfortunately, some oil companies may not make it through the current oil price slump. Still others will make it to the other side, but only by severely slashing their dividends. The best companies, though, will be able to maintain or increase their dividends and still emerge relatively unscathed thanks to the strength of their operations and their balance sheets. 
Oil may not be the right place to invest your money right now, but if you do decide to buy in, Royal Dutch Shell, ExxonMobil, and Phillips 66 look like some of the best picks you can make. 



Before you consider Royal Dutch Shell plc, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Royal Dutch Shell plc wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Right now, the stock market may seem like an investor's nightmare, with shares of companies large and small down by double-digit percentages so far this year. But on the other hand, it might actually look like an opportunity for value investors. Plenty of stocks, especially large-cap stocks, are trading at bargain prices.
Unfortunately, a lot of those stocks are cheap for good reasons. Coronavirus-related travel restrictions, the oil price war, and a souring global economy may make it hard for some of these beaten-down companies to recover.
But even in a market like this one, savvy investors can find good prospects. Three large-cap stocks that are looking like top buys right now are Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.A)(NYSE:RDS.B), ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), and Disney (NYSE:DIS). Here's why you may want to consider grabbing shares while they're cheap.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The first large-cap stock I'm picking is the largest oil company in the world by revenue, integrated oil-and-gas giant Royal Dutch Shell. Its shares, down about 37% in 2020, have fallen farther than the broader market thanks to collapsing oil prices.
After Saudi Arabia and Russia failed to come to an agreement about production limits in early March, both countries vowed to flood the market with cheap oil, cutting crude prices almost in half, and stocks across the industry fell as well. Shell's shares lost about half their value over the next two weeks, before rebounding a bit after management announced it would be cutting its 2020 expenses and suspending its share-repurchase program. 
The market liked those moves because they offered some indication that Shell wouldn't cut its best-in-class dividend, currently yielding above 10%. While the current crude oversupply isn't good news for Shell in the short term, the company has a solid balance sheet, a sizable cash hoard, and plenty of experience weathering periods of low oil prices. It should have no problem continuing its payout until oil prices stabilize...whenever that happens to be.
While Shell's dividend yield may be the highest among the oil majors, it hasn't actually upped its quarterly payout per share since 2014. However, its fellow oil major ExxonMobil has increased its dividend every year since then...in fact, every year since 1983. 
That record makes ExxonMobil one of a small number of Dividend Aristocrats -- companies that have increased their dividend payments annually for at least 25 straight years. Maintaining that status is very important to the company, which is just one reason why it's likely to up its payout again this year, even though it's currently yielding almost 9% -- a record high for the company.
ExxonMobil is also going to be hurt in the short term by low oil prices, and if the oil superpowers of Saudi Arabia, Russia, and the U.S. can't get a deal worked out on production limits soon, its shares -- along with Shell's and all the other oil companies -- are likely to be volatile and may fall even farther. But ExxonMobil's size and global footprint position it well to weather short-term volatility and reward investors in the long run.
Speaking of companies that are experiencing short-term headwinds, Disney is experiencing more of a short-term hurricane. Coronavirus-necessitated travel restrictions have forced it to close all its theme parks indefinitely, and those are still expensive to maintain even without guests. Movie theaters are closed, so it has pushed new film debuts off into the future. And its powerhouse ESPN television network doesn't have much content to show since professional and college sports leagues have canceled their seasons. 
Small wonder that the stock market has sent the House of Mouse's shares tumbling 35% so far this year. This is one of the few times since 2015 that the company's stock can be had for less than $100 a share. 
Disney's biggest asset -- its vast catalog of content, which includes Pixar, Marvel, and the Star Wars universe -- isn't going anywhere. And once tourists start traveling again, moviegoers start buying tickets again, and sports leagues start...sportsing again, Disney should quickly regain its spot atop the pedestal of the entertainment universe.
In the meantime, its Disney+ and Hulu streaming services are providing an invaluable service to home-bound citizens (especially those with kids). 
Large-cap stocks tend to add stability to a portfolio, but as long as the COVID-19 pandemic is keeping the entire economy on uncertain ground, even large-cap stocks will experience their fair share of volatility. But that can be a good thing for investors looking to buy shares at a discount. And right now, Royal Dutch Shell, ExxonMobil, and Disney look like bargains.



Before you consider Royal Dutch Shell plc, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Royal Dutch Shell plc wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


As much as the rest of the stock market has been on a strange, painful ride over the past six weeks, oil stocks have been brutalized. Global oil markets are in total disarray as oil demand craters with global travel all but halted, and Saudi Arabia threatens to flood the market further in an effort to re-establish its dominance. 
Yet even with demand cratering and global heavyweights threatening to drown out competitors, there's still hope. OPEC and other producers including Russia are set to meet this week to discuss potential output cuts to help stabilize oil prices in the near term. In the long term, oil demand will recover once travel resumes and businesses reopen. 
THE OIL PATCH IS LADEN WITH RISK, BUT THERE IS VALUE FOR INVESTORS WILLING TO BE PATIENT. IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The latter -- an eventual recovery for oil -- has many investors hunting in the oil patch for value right now. After all, while many oil producers will struggle and some will fail, there should be plenty of value to be had for patient investors willing to ride out the worst of the downturn. And that's true; but the challenge right now, is discerning where there's value, and where there's a trap waiting to spring. 
The one segment of the oil industry that's filled with value traps now is the independent producer space. We have already seen one former high-flying independent producer fall from grace, with Whiting Petroleum (NYSE:WLL) filing for chapter 11 bankruptcy to restructure its debt in early April.
The company will continue as a going interest and emerge from bankruptcy with a much stronger balance sheet, exchanging $2.2 billion of its debt for equity. But common shareholders will see 97% of their stake in the company evaporate if the courts approve the deal -- which is likely -- with its lenders. 
Whiting may be the first of the big independent producers to wipe investors out, but it's unlikely to prove the only. Chesapeake Energy (OTC:CHKA.Q) has been on the cusp of financial trouble since well before the oil crash, and could be in serious trouble sooner rather than later. 
The list gets longer the more you deeper you go. Here are how several other independent producer's balance sheets compare to Whiting and Chesapeake:

WLL FINANCIAL DEBT TO EBITDA (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS
That's a massive amount of debt leverage, particularly when you consider how much their earnings are set to fall in the current oil price environment. For context of how leveraged these (and plenty more) producers really are, ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) sports a debt to EBITDA ratio (that's earnings before interest, tax, depreciation, and amortization) below 1.1, and a 12.5% debt-to-assets ratio. Not to mention the diversity of its operations that give it other sources of cash flow when oil prices crater. 
Simply put, the pure-play producers that already have a ton of debt are in trouble. Oil prices are down 60% since the first quarter, and back below $24 per barrel. Most producers need $40 oil to just cover their costs, much less make a profit. 
Even massive cuts, like those made by Apache (NASDAQ:APA) to its capital spending and dividend, will only go so far to keep lenders at bay. Occidental (NYSE:OXY), with more than $3 billion in cash at quarter-end, has some margin of safety, but most producers don't even carry enough cash to cover a single quarter's operating expenses. 
If you're an overleveraged producer, good luck getting any bankers to take your call right now. Bankruptcy could prove the only path forward for many producers over the next couple of quarters. 
Like in other industries that are subject to big cyclical shifts in demand, the companies with the best balance sheets, some ability to scale their operations, and diversity of those operations, tend to make the best investments. That's certainly the case in the oil industry. 
The reason? Simply put, the companies that have the ability to survive an extended downturn will be the ones that generate the most value. Start with reducing downside risks first, and then capturing returns. 
In the oil industry, that means the integrated majors. Top companies such as Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.A)(NYSE:RDS.B), Chevron (NYSE:CVX), and the aforementioned ExxonMobil along with non-producer, but still highly integrated Phillips 66 (NYSE:PSX). 
Here's how these four compare with the other highly leveraged producers: 

CVX FINANCIAL DEBT TO EBITDA (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS
There's more to the value-preservation aspect. Independent oil producers count oil reserves as their biggest asset. With oil prices down more than 60%, many producers will be forced to write down the value of their holdings in the near future. That will further erode their value to access capital. 
It's worth noting that the integrated major above with significant downstream segments will deal with the same thing, but to a lesser degree. They will continue to own the pipelines, refineries, and petrochemicals facilities that producers will still need to turn oil into money, and those assets should hold their value much better. Phillips 66, which does not operate any oil production, will dodge this issue completely (a reason it's still my pick for the biggest winner). 
In addition to having lower leverage, these integrated majors also have substantial liquidity reserves. Shell ended the quarter with $18 billion in cash and equivalents, Chevron had $5.75 billion, and ExxonMobil had $3.1 billion. When you start adding in low-cost debt they can tap, the numbers get even bigger. Even Phillips 66, with "only" $1.6 billion in cash, has another $5 billion in credit management can access at a moment's notice. 
That's why, as a category, the integrated majors have seen their stock prices hold up much better than independent producers: 

CVX DATA BY YCHARTS
But as the chart above shows, there's still tremendous upside to be had, along with a lower risk of permanent losses. For instance, Shell, ExxonMobil, and Phillips 66 share prices would have to almost double to get back to where they were less than three months ago, while Chevron stock would have to gain 50% to fully recover. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Don't make the mistake of assuming that the value to be found in the oil patch will result in a quick buck. Oil prices are not likely to bounce back anytime soon -- at least in a sustained way -- even if we see major cuts from global oil producers soon.
The crash in global oil demand is going to be so extreme, it's creating a bigger short-term problem: nowhere to put all the oil that's being produced. That could send oil prices falling even further as producers scramble to shut in production and fill every storage facility available to the brim. And all that excess oil will create a bigger problem, adding to how long it takes for the industry to recover. 
Add it all up, and investors who race too quickly into oil stocks could also lose another way: opportunity cost. I expect plenty of investors will hold oil stocks, waiting for a recovery, while plenty of other sectors of the economy bounce back and return to full strength much sooner. 
So before you rush into the oil patch looking to load up on bargains, consider that while there is value, the oil recovery could take a lot longer than other sectors, and even the best-capitalized companies might not deliver the returns you expect as quick as you want. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Following years of a slow but steady climb for the stock market, Wall Street has been firmly reminded over the past 7 weeks that equities can, and will, move in both directions. Since Feb. 19, we've witnessed:
We've also witnessed truly unprecedented unemployment data in the wake of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), with weekly jobless claims totaling 10 million over the past two weeks. The previous two-week record, dating back many decades, was 1.4 million jobless claims.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Suffice it to say that investors are having their resolve tested like never before.
However, it's also a potential once-in-a-generation opportunity to put money to work in a market with considerably more attractive valuations. After all, every single correction and bear market in history has eventually been erased by a bull-market rally. Patient investors who give their investment thesis the time to play out are often handsomely rewarded.
The thing is, with brokerage commissions largely eliminated, you no longer have to be sitting on a mountain of cash to make money in the stock market. Even taking $100 in disposable cash (i.e., money you won't need to pay bills or for your emergency fund) and opening a position in the following four stocks right now could put you on a path toward financial freedom.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Even though bank stocks are probably toward the bottom of most investors' buy lists at the moment, I don't believe now is the time to turn a blind eye to the most efficient big bank in the entire industry, U.S. Bancorp (NYSE:USB).
Without question, banks are expected to see a reduction in net interest income given that the Federal Reserve moved its federal funds rate back to an all-time low. They'll also likely see a modest rise in loan delinquencies with more people out of work due to COVID-19. But these aren't long-term worries for a historically conservative bank like U.S. Bancorp that's avoided risky bets and has almost entirely leaned on loan and deposit growth to bolster its bottom line.
Among big banks, U.S. Bancorp is consistently at the top when it comes to return on assets (ROA), and it's done an excellent job of pushing members to use digital banking and mobile applications. This digital push has allows U.S. Bancorp to close some of its branches, thereby lowering its noninterest expenses and upping its ROA. With this stock now cheaper than it's been in over a decade relative to its book value, now is the time to pounce.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
For the past year, marijuana has been an absolute dud of an investment, especially in Canada where regulatory issues have created everything from shortages of product to huge supply bottlenecks in key provinces. But if there's a clear-cut winner of the pot industry in Canada, my money is on OrganiGram Holdings (NASDAQ:OGI).
Perhaps the biggest advantage OrganiGram brings to the table is that it's only operating a single facility (in Moncton, New Brunswick). Having only one cultivation and processing center means it's a lot easier for the company to manage supply chain expenses and adjust production to meet domestic demand.
It also doesn't hurt that OrganiGram's projected peak output is around 230 grams per square foot. That's roughly two to three times higher than its peers. This has to do with the company utilizing a three-tiered growing system at Moncton, thereby maximizing the close to 500,000 square feet of available cultivation space.
The ride could be bumpy in the near-term, but as the only Canadian licensed producer to have generated a no-nonsense operating profit to date, it deserves to be in investors' portfolios.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
There's no denying that oil stocks have been rocked in 2020 by the freefall in demand for crude and the subsequent price war between Saudi Arabia and Russia. But integrated oil and gas giant ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) is built to survive relatively short-term shocks to the energy market.
One of the keys to ExxonMobil's success is its integrated operations. Although it makes the bulk of its margins from its upstream operations (drilling and exploration), the company's downstream operations (refining and chemicals) act as a hedge. Typically, when the price of crude declines, it becomes more profitable to refine petrol products. Once we're passed the worst of the COVID-19 pandemic, these downstream operations will come in particularly handy for ExxonMobil.
This is also a company that has plenty of levers it can pull in the cost department. Having initially set a capital expenditure budget of between $30 billion and $33 billion for 2020, it would not be difficult for ExxonMobil to shave billions off of these capital plans. It also paid out more than $14.6 billion in dividends in 2019 and could consider shrinking its payout to conserve cash.
In short, ExxonMobil has the tools to be a long-term winner in fossil fuels.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Investors should also consider taking $100 and opening a position in companion pet insurance provider Trupanion (NASDAQ:TRUP).
The insurance industry is far from sexy, but it's very good at making money given the typically strong pricing power of insurers. But the companion pet market offers a truly unique scenario given that it's relatively untapped. Only between 1% and 2% of North American pet owners currently has medical insurance on their four-legged family members, opening the door for an exceptionally long runway of growth.
What's more, companion pets are increasingly thought of as "family" by their owners and not simply as pets. This means owners are willing to spend somewhat liberally to ensure the well-being of their four-legged family. Last year, Americans spent $95.7 billion on their pets, according to the American Pet Products Association, with over $29 billion alone on veterinary care and product sales. 
With Trupanion about to turn the corner to recurring profitability, and staring down a major opportunity, now is the time to buy.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


