Money market funds and CDs aren't cutting it with income investors these days. With interest rates so low it's only natural for risk-averse investors to find themselves in the stock market for all the wrong reasons. 
Let's go over a few pointers to help yield chasers make the most of Wall Street.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
If you run a stock screen and sort for the highest payouts you're literally asking for trouble. The beefiest yields are typically bountiful for a reason. In this climate where low interest rates are the norm you're not going to find a sustainable high yield without a catch.
Even once you work through the tangle of complicated limited partnerships, closed-end funds, and REITs with bright payouts but dim prospects, you're looking for trouble if you aim too high. Even recognizing a name can be a yield-chasing mistake. 
ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) may seem like a can't-miss opportunity with its 10.4% yield. You should be somewhat familiar with the crude oil and natural gas giant, but do you realize that the stock has shed roughly half of its value in 2020? Investors approaching ExxonMobil at the beginning of the year with its 5% yield may have thought they were buying into a Dow Inc. component with pedigree papers, but they've lost half of their stock value for a stock that was ultimately replaced in the Dow Jones Industrial Average. With consumption trends and profitability going the wrong way it's not realistic to bet on a turnaround anytime soon.  
If chasing yields can be dangerous it also follows that dismissing low-yielding stocks can be a missed connection. Let's try NVIDIA (NASDAQ:NVDA) on for size. The pioneer of GPU-accelerated computing's $0.16-a-share quarterly distribution doesn't amount to much given the stock's triple-digit price tag. However, don't judge a story's book by its payout cover. 
NVIDIA's yield was less than 0.3% at the start of 2020, and it's now even more yawn-worthy at a little more than 0.1%. However, the yield has been cut by more than half because the stock has more than doubled this year. NVIDIA shares have soared 124% as gamers, scientists, and designers flock to its solutions. Income investors may have glossed over NVIDIA with its pedestrian yields, but it would take you roughly two decades of a stock marching in place with a 5% yield to achieve the gain that NVIDIA investors have experienced in less than a single year. Income is nice, but capital gains are better. 
Set your sights lower on the payout front, and you may find a company with strong prospects to keep boosting its distributions as its bottom line improves. NextEra Energy (NYSE:NEE) with its 1.9% current yield will be at the low end of the universe of utility stocks, but it's worth a look. 
As a Florida power utility it's in a state where the population is growing, and that obviously matters. It's also the world's largest generator of renewable energy from the wind and sun, making it a no-brainer for the future of power generation. Analysts see earnings climbing at an annualized clip of 8% through the next four years, so the dividend rate that has moved higher for 25 consecutive years should keep moving in the right direction. 
Big dividends are nice, but sustainable payouts in improving companies will always be better. Investing in dividend stocks should always be more about your actual investment than the distributions. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


U.S. energy giant ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) has fallen on hard times, with its stock down roughly 50% so far in 2020. It's certainly not the only international oil major that is struggling, but investors need to step back and consider a number of key factors before deciding to buy this stock. Third-quarter earnings will be released Friday, Oct. 30. Here's a quick look at some of the key factors to consider.
Environmentalists would have you believe that the demise of carbon fuels like oil and natural gas is fast approaching. That's not likely to be the case, given that oil and gas are so integral to the global energy picture. Yes, clean energy is growing rapidly and displacing carbon fuels. But that's mostly coming at the expense of coal, while oil and natural gas are set to remain key energy sources for decades under even aggressive clean-energy scenarios. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
In fact, it takes a long time to transition from one energy source to another. Oil, for example, took 100 years to displace coal as the largest global energy source. Sure, things may move more quickly this time around, but the need for Exxon's energy business isn't going away overnight. 
While some once very prominent energy companies, like Chesapeake Energy, have filed for bankruptcy, Exxon is nowhere near that point. For starters, Exxon has a long history of running its business conservatively. That hasn't materially changed, with financial debt to equity at a reasonable 0.35 times. That's notable, as Exxon has taken on debt so it can continue to invest in its business and pay its dividend, but it's still toward the low end of its peer group. In fact, only peer Chevron has a lower ratio, at 0.20 times. Based on these first two points, the "worst-case" scenario for investors is unlikely to be a total loss of capital. And, assuming that the current industry disruptions prove temporary, there could be material recovery potential after such a large price decline. Energy is, historically speaking, a cyclical industry. 

XOM FINANCIAL DEBT TO EQUITY (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS
Now for a tougher call. Exxon has increased its dividend consecutively for 37 years. That's an incredible streak, particularly when you consider that oil is a highly volatile commodity. The deep price declines in the face of lax demand because of COVID-19 is just the most recent example of that, though a particularly troubling one. There are two problems here for Exxon, both of which tie back into the company's decision to increase its leverage.  
First, in recent years Exxon has embarked on a massive capital spending program as it looks to get its production growing again. It has pulled back on the spending front, as have its peers, but it really can't give up on the plan because it needs to make these investments if it wants to grow.
Second, Exxon's long-term commitment to the dividend could be wavering. Management basically announced that it was reluctant to take on more debt when Exxon held its second-quarter 2020 earnings conference call. Although it remained committed to the dividend, if oil prices don't mount a sustained recovery, it may not be able to support both the dividend and its capital spending plans without taking on more debt.
If push came to shove, and management chose to avoid additional debt, the dividend would likely lose out to capital spending. This is, simplifying things a bit, basically what happened at BP and Royal Dutch Shell, both of which trimmed their payments in 2020.   
For investors looking to invest in the out-of-favor energy sector, and who don't care too much about dividends, Exxon remains a solid option. There's material turnaround potential if energy prices start to pick up again. However, dividend-focused investors should tread with a bit more caution. Yes the 10% dividend yield is enticing, but the risks of a dividend cut have materially increased. In fact, while a dividend was once virtually unthinkable, so far the company has only really stated that it will maintain the dividend through 2020. If you are an income investor, other oil and gas options like Chevron may be a better call right now.    



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


