It's easy to invest in popular stocks. It's a lot harder to be first to spot a change in the way investors are thinking about entire industries and to buy shares of beaten-down companies. Over the long run, though, having the courage to buck the trend can mean the difference between being a good investor and a great one.
Early this week, stock market investors celebrated the news that another promising coronavirus vaccine candidate could be available soon. That sent major market benchmarks flying. However, it did even more good for one area of the market that was getting crushed even before COVID-19. Finally, some investors are seeing signs of life in an area many had left for dead.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The energy markets haven't cooperated with investors for years. Now there are some signs that investor sentiment about companies in the oil and gas industry might finally be starting to improve.
Back in 2014, oil was above $100 per barrel. Then the emergence of plentiful supplies from shale oil plays massively shifted the market, sending prices down sharply. That weakened the political strength of oil-producing countries that rely on revenue from crude sales to drive their local economies. In the years since, damaged relationships between those countries have hampered efforts to control production and get the supply-demand equation back into balance. The COVID-19 pandemic only worsened industry conditions by drying up demand temporarily.
Now, though, positive news about coronavirus vaccines is leading value investors to seek out bargains in energy. You can see the influence of value hunters across the oil and gas spectrum from Monday's price action:
Energy has been in a downward spiral for a long time, so even a whiff of optimism is welcome news. But it'll take sustained increases in oil prices to help many companies. A lot more than a modest rise in crude prices to the $41 to $42 per barrel range will be necessary to turn the tide.
Nevertheless, as we've seen with travel stocks, beaten-down sectors of the stock market can mount powerful rallies. If energy markets can sustain and build on their recent gains, oil and gas stocks could still have a lot further to climb.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


