
IMAGE SOURCE: FLICKR USER SIMON CUNNINGHAM.
Dividend investing can add significantly to returns over a lifetime, so beginner investors are right to want to own some dividend-paying stocks in their portfolios. However, knowing which dividend-paying stock is the right one to buy may be daunting, so we've asked our top Motley Fool contributors to weigh in with some of their favorite dividend stock picks. 
Todd Campbell: Dividend-paying stocks can add significantly to returns over the long haul, but beginning investors should remember that a high dividend doesn't necessarily mean a good investment.
Plenty of stocks offer enticing dividend yields, but have businesses that are floundering, and because of that, it makes more sense to focus on the health of a company first and the dividend yield second. Using that approach, one of my favorite dividend-paying stocks is Microsoft (NASDAQ:MSFT).
The company's Windows 10 has been installed on more than 100 million devices (and climbing) and deep integration of other profit-friendly services, such as Bing, offer up significant tailwinds exiting the holiday sales season. Additionally, the company's laser-focus on cloud solutions and cross-platform software sales solidifies its standing as a Goliath in business productivity.
Even better, with about $100 billion in cash on the books, Microsoft boasts one of the best balance sheets out there, and a reasonable forward P/E ratio of just 17.7 means that investors aren't paying up too much to buy shares. Given the company's business and finances are solid and its shares yield a healthy 2.6%, this could be an excellent dividend stock for beginning investors to own.
Tyler Crowe: For investors that are looking for their first dividend stock in the energy & materials space, Exxonmobil (NYSE:XOM) is a great place to start. Its vertically integrated business model helps to offset the cyclical nature of the oil and gas industry. When oil prices are high, its production business segment does well while typically its refining and retail segments suffer and vice versa when oil prices are low.
But the company doesn't just lean on this model for its success, the company also one of the most disciplined capital allocators in the energy space. Unlike others that plow tons of money back into the business during the boom times and then go to skeleton budgets when cash flows are scarce, Exxonmobil consistently invests through the commodity cycle. It may not soar in the boom times, but it is almost always better positioned to handle the downturn. This disciplined approach keeps its balance sheet in pretty good shape and has given the company a credit rating better than the US Treasury.
Add all these things up, and you get a company that has the ability to consistently pay an ever increasing dividend. For an investor looking for their first foray into energy dividends, Exxonmobil is a great place to start. 
Andres Cardenal: Beginning dividend investors typically want to play it safe by investing in well-known dividend stocks with a proven track-record of dividend payments over the long term. With this in mind, a rock-solid dividend powerhouse such as Procter & Gamble (NYSE:PG) could be a smart choice for those giving their first steps in dividend investing.
The company owns 21 different brands making over $1 billion each in global annual revenue, this includes household names such as Pampers, Charmin, Oral-B, and Ariel, among many others. Procter & Gamble sells mostly everyday necessities, and this provides stability to the company's sales and cash flows through good and bad economic times.
The company is restructuring its portfolio of brands in order to better focus on the most profitable names with superior potential for growth. In addition, P&G is embarked on an ambitious cost-cutting project, and management estimates it's on track to delivering $7 billion in cost savings by the end of 2015.
Procter & Gamble one of the strongest trajectories of dividend payments around, the company has paid uninterrupted dividends for 125 years, and it has increased payments over the last 59 years on a row. Procter & Gamble's dividend yield stands at around 3.4% versus current prices. 


Before you consider Microsoft Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Microsoft Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021



IMAGE SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL.
There are no guarantees when it comes to investing, but there are some things that we all take for granted. One of them is that companies with long track records of increasing dividends will continue to do so year in, year out. One of those companies is ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM). For more than 30 years, the company has raised its dividend like clockwork, and hasn't cut its cash dividend since 1948. 
If there was any reason to think that ExxonMobil might not raise its dividend in 2016, it's that the last time the oil and gas market was in such rough shape was when we saw the company's last dividend growth transgression. So just to be sure that we can expect another dividend increase this coming year, let's take a look at what is working in the company's favor and what might cause it to hiccup. 
What's working in its favor
We can't simply assume that ExxonMobil will raise its dividend because that is what it has done for more than 30 years. Applying that logic to former Dividend Aristocrat stocks like Eastman Kodak didn't turn out so well. What really matters when it comes to ExxonMobil's dividend is the company's ability to generate free cash flow. What makes the company unique in the oil and gas space is that it is a vertically integrated business, meaning it has a hand in every aspect of the business from exploring new sources all the way to gas being pumped into your tank. 
These various business segments typically react to the price of oil in different ways, so one well-performing segment can help to offset weakness in another. This is a very important trait to have in today's oil and gas market. Even though oil prices have hit the company's production business unit hard, it has been able to make up for it with strength in its refining and chemical divisions. Even with oil prices for the entirety of 2015 in the $45-$50 range, ExxonMobil was still able to generate more than $26 billion in cash flow from operations over the first nine months of the year, which left about $6 billion to pay shareholder distributions. 
Another thing that might help ExxonMobil make another dividend hike is that there is some wiggle room in its spending habits. Next year's capital spending budget is expected to be a couple billion dollars fewer than what it was in 2015, and that is even before some of the realized savings from lower service contract rates. Also, management has repurchased $3.2 billion in shares so far this year and plans to buy back another $500 million in the fourth quarter.
If ExxonMobil's management can wring out some bigger savings in its capital budget and, if necessary, redeploy that $3.7 billion in share repurchases, then there should be adequate cash somewhere in the business to raise the dividend.
What's working against a dividend increase
The one thing that could be of concern is that ExxonMobil's budget has been pretty tight lately. Even with cash from operations and asset sales, the company has come up a little short on funding capital expenditures and shareholder returns in the first nine months of 2015, and there are very few signs that the fourth quarter will rapidly turn these trends around. 

IMAGE SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL INVESTOR PRESENTATION.
Also, keep in mind that a good chunk of that cash flow was with oil prices north of $50 per barrel in 2015. Even though the company is able to offset some weakness from production with chemical and refining gains, chances are it won't be able to fully cover that low of a price. 
While this is something worth keeping track of, it's hard to see this completely wiping out a chance at a dividend raise. ExxonMobil still maintains its AAA credit rating and a debt-to-capital ratio of 13.7%. As much as it may be painful to say after watching so many companies flounder with debt problems, ExxonMobil does have the financial strength to lean on the debt market a little to cover any short-term cash needs in 2016. 
If this market weakness were to continue into 2017, though, then having to tap the debt market to fund capital budgets and dividends will not look good.
What a Fool believes
As safe as ExxonMobil's dividend may seem, no investor should assume that it is a guarantee in a market where oil prices are now close to 70% off their highs in mid-2014. Based on the company's relative strength in the industry, a steadier stream of cash from its vertically integrated business model, and some wiggle room in its budget and shareholder repurchase program, it appears that investors can sleep well knowing that another dividend increase is likely to happen in 2016.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


