M&A (mergers and acquisitions) was a hot topic on quarterly conference calls across the oil patch over the past month, spurred by a string of recent deals. However, while some oil-company executives spoke about their openness to acquisitions, others made it clear that they have no desire to make a deal. While that could be a negotiating tactic, many oil companies believe they can create more value for their investors by standing pat than by going on the offensive.
Diamondback Energy (NASDAQ:FANG) has been on an acquisitions binge this year. The company has signed several deals, including one to acquire rival Energen for $9.2 billion in stock. These transactions have turned it into one of the largest producers in the Permian Basin while providing it with a vast inventory of future drilling locations.
However, despite all that M&A activity, CEO Travis Stice stated on the third-quarter call that Diamondback "will continue to look for assets complementary to our existing asset base that compete for capital right away within our existing portfolio, at acquisition prices that allow us to generate full-cycle returns well in excess of our cost to capital." While Diamondback does expect to be on the sidelines as it integrates the Energen deal, it has no plans to give up on M&A, which has been the lifeblood of the company.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Meanwhile, ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) also hinted that it's still on the prowl after making a big deal in the Permian Basin last year. When asked about the company's thoughts on M&A amid the recent increase in deal-making during the third-quarter call, Jack Williams, a senior vice president at the oil giant, said:
We do maintain the financial strength to be able to capitalize on any environment we find ourselves in that might present an attractive opportunity. And we continue to scan the market for all opportunities that play to our strengths ... So we're continuing to look.
That's evident from a more recent report suggesting that Exxon is considering a bid for privately held oil producer Endeavor Energy Resources.
However, while Exxon and Diamondback Energy remain open to making deals, several rivals have stated that they have no desire for corporate M&A. EOG Resources' (NYSE:EOG) CEO Bill Thomas, for example, said on that company's third-quarter call that "I just want to reiterate, we have no interest, no need in even thinking about expensive corporate M&A." That's no surprise; EOG Resources has long made it clear that it's focused on organically growing the company through exploration, since that generates higher returns and creates more value than most mergers.
Marathon Oil (NYSE:MRO) CEO Lee Tillman also noted that his company prefers to focus on organic expansion rather than M&A. He said on the third-quarter call that Marathon is extending its core areas in the Eagle Ford and Bakken, making small bolt-on acreage acquisitions and trades in the Delaware Basin, and exploring new areas such as Louisiana.
"This multipronged approach," according to Tillman, "provides a sustainable framework for ongoing resource-base improvement with a focus on full-cycle returns, and without the need for any large-scale M&A." While he recognized that "M&A has been very topical recently, our extensive portfolio transformation that has created a differentiated position in the four best U.S. resource plays means the hard work on our portfolio is behind us." So "large-scale M&A is not a consideration, nor is it required for our future success."
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP) also addressed the topic of M&A on its third-quarter call. CEO Ryan Lance noted that the company puts M&A into three buckets: leasing undeveloped land, small acreage or asset purchases, and corporate M&A. He stated that "we've been executing the first two buckets over the course of the last couple of years, as we've kind of got the company back on its front foot a little bit." For example, it bought some land in the Montney shale play in Canada, joined Marathon and EOG in an emerging area of Louisiana, and is making some small deals in Alaska to bolster its position there.
However, Lance noted that large-scale M&A is: "kind of a tough hurdle in the company, because it needs to be competitive on a constant-supply basis. And with the current prices, they're still pretty frothy for large companies or small companies and some of the bigger deals that are going on right now."
However, he did go on to say:
We watch them, we look at them all, and we know what we like. And we're patient. We're persistent. We believe that this business is going to go through cycles. And we'll always look at it and have an opportunity when another down cycle occurs.
That openness to the right opportunity is why the same report linking Exxon to Endeavor Energy Resources also suggested that ConocoPhillips was considering a bid for the company. However, unless the perfect deal falls in its lap at the right price, ConocoPhillips will likely take a pass on large-scale M&A, since it has plenty of growth embedded in its current portfolio.
While deal-making has been making a comeback in the oil patch this year, not all oil company executives are interested in taking the plunge. That's because they believe their companies already have the right resources to create long-term value for their investors. So, unless an opportunity they can't pass up comes along, many big-name oil companies plan to sit out of the industry's current consolidation wave -- and focus on growing the old-fashioned way by exploring for new sources of oil, rather than paying up to acquire existing ones.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Dividend stocks are a great way for investors to meet two key objectives in their portfolios. Not only do they pay income you can use right now to cover living expenses, but they also have the potential to deliver share-price appreciation over time. Getting growth and income in a single investment is attractive -- and can be quite lucrative as well.
With recent stock market volatility, many dividend stocks have gotten bid up to expensive levels. But value-conscious investors can still find promising dividend-paying companies whose shares are reasonably priced. With this in mind, let's take a closer look at JPMorgan Chase (NYSE:JPM), Altria Group (NYSE:MO), and ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and find out why many dividend investors are interested in their shares right now.
JPMorgan Chase is the biggest bank in the country, with more than $2.5 trillion in assets and a wide-ranging banking operation that spans retail checking and savings accounts, personal and commercial loans, credit cards, and business banking services. Despite being among the banking institutions to receive government funding during the financial crisis, JPMorgan emerged from the market meltdown as one of the strongest financial institutions in the U.S., and its quick return to health led to dramatic gains for shareholders.
IMAGE SOURCE: JPMORGAN CHASE.
One clear sign of JPMorgan's strength is the pace at which it's raised its dividend over the past decade. After having to cut its payout to $0.05 per share during the financial crisis, nine subsequent dividend increases have brought JPMorgan's quarterly dividend all the way to $0.80, including a hike of more than 40% earlier this year. A 3% yield is right in the sweet spot for JPMorgan, giving investors enough income to satisfy them while leaving it with enough capital reserves to keep regulators happy. With a strong economy, favorable conditions in the financial industry, and a vote of confidence from one of the most successful investors of all time, JPMorgan is primed to sustain its leadership position well into the future.
Altria is one of the most successful stocks of all time, and dividends have always played a key role in its overall returns. The tobacco giant has often sported dividend yields of 5% to 10% in its history, especially during periods when its business model was under fundamental attack from litigation, regulation, consumer advocates, and other naysayers. Through it all, Altria has managed to overcome falling demand for cigarettes to keep revenue and earnings consistently moving higher. Along the way, Altria's dividend has gone up 52 times in the past 49 years, and its current yield of 6% puts it near the top 10 dividend stocks in the S&P 500.
Altria has a couple of interesting opportunities for growth, and both are tied to alternatives to its traditional cigarette business. On one hand, its long collaboration with Philip Morris International (NYSE:PM) offers a chance for Altria to sell the IQOS heated-tobacco system in the U.S. if it can get approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. More recently, speculation has arisen that Altria might take a minority stake in privately held e-cigarette and vapor specialist Juul Labs, thereby making a bigger push into that increasingly popular segment. Despite ongoing regulatory threats, Altria has good opportunities to keep growing in the years to come.
Finally, ExxonMobil is a household name every investor knows. The giant integrated oil company has operations across the globe, and the earnings it's consistently brought in support a dividend yield that's currently more than 4%. The company has also been good to shareholders over the years, delivering dividend increases for 36 consecutive years.
Volatility in the crude oil market has made some investors question whether ExxonMobil's dividend is truly safe. Yet even with prices having fallen recently, the oil giant's overall strategic plan shows its dedication to making sure that its shareholders are in a position to keep getting their quarterly income far into the future. The stock price might well continue to rise and fall along with the price of crude, but ExxonMobil's history of making the best of the industry's cycles speaks for itself.
In addition to having lucrative payouts and good future prospects, these three dividend stocks all trade at valuations that are quite a bit less expensive than that of the overall market. But that's not likely to last long -- making now a good time to look closely at whether these stocks deserve a place in your dividend stock portfolio.



Before you consider JPMorgan Chase & Co., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and JPMorgan Chase & Co. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Dividend-focused investors often prefer stocks with higher yields, which makes complete sense. But a high yield alone isn't a good enough reason to buy a stock. You need to think about high-yield dividend stocks a little deeper than that. Here are five facts that you need to know to make sure the high-yield stocks you buy are the best options for your portfolio.
A lot of investors focus on valuation tools like the price-to-earnings and price-to-book value ratios. Those are important tools that should be used in the valuation process. But a high yield can also signal that a stock is relatively cheap. All you need to do is look at the yield relative to its historical trends. If a stock's yield is at the high end of its yield history, it's probably worth taking a closer look.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
For example, ExxonMobil Corporation's (NYSE:XOM) yield is currently around 4.1%. That's near the highest levels since the mid-1990s. There are reasons for this and investors need to dig into the facts before hitting the buy button. However, this oil giant is financially strong and the dividend looks solid. This appears to be a situation where a great company is simply working through a tough time. While short-term investors are dumping out, and pushing the yield up toward historically high levels, long-term investors have an opportunity to jump aboard.
While a high yield can highlight opportunity, it can also signal that a company's troubles are so bad that a dividend cut is in the cards. Which is why you have to do your homework before buying a high-yield dividend stock. A great recent example of this was Plains All American Pipeline LP (NASDAQ:PAA).

PAA DIVIDEND YIELD (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS.
Between 2015 and early 2016, the midstream master limited partnership's yield rocketed from around 5% to over 16%! Two distribution cuts later, the yield is down to around 6%. The warning sign here was weak distribution coverage, with the partnership paying out more cash in distributions than it was generating to cover them. But there was more going on: A downturn in the energy space was limiting access to the capital markets for most midstream companies at the time, and Plains' debt levels were at historically high levels. That's a toxic combination still being witnessed throughout the midstream space. To put it simply, Plains All American had little flexibility to deal with a difficult period and was forced to cut its distribution.   
Exxon's financial and industry positions, by comparison, are rock solid. So while a high yield can signal opportunity, it can also be a warning that the dividend is at risk of being cut. To figure out what is going on, you need to dig a little into the story behind the yield.
With that quick caveat in mind, it's important to remember just how valuable dividends are over time. Since 1871, roughly half of the S&P 500's return is attributable to dividends. The other half is attributable to price appreciation. Let that sink in for a moment -- dividends make up a huge portion of the market's total return over time.   
But think about this concept in a different way using the rule of 72. By dividing 72 by a stock's yield, you can get a rough estimate of how long it would take you to double your money if you reinvest the dividend and assume the stock price stays the same. In the case of Exxon, it would take around 17.5 years to double your money. That's a long time to wait, but if you can find a stock yielding 6% that's out of favor for what appear to be temporary reasons, the number drops to just 12 years. At 7% you could double your money in roughly a decade. These aren't unusual yields for real estate investment trusts (REITs) and limited partnerships, and can occasionally be found in other sectors during market downturns. And remember, this calculation assumes that stock prices don't change. Price appreciation would add to your returns over time.   
Switching gears a little bit, there's a fundamental issue about where dividends come from that investors need to understand. Very often you'll see a stock's payout ratio highlighted. This metric effectively takes dividend per share and divides it by earnings per share to tell investors how much of a company's earnings are getting distributed as dividends. It's a valuable number to know, with lower percentages signaling very safe dividends. However, dividends don't come from earnings; they come from cash flow.
Plains All American is an interesting example on this front because distribution coverage in the limited partnership space is calculated based on distributable cash flow. This is because midstream partnerships tend to have high levels of depreciation, a noncash charge that depresses earnings per share. The same is true in the REIT space, where the funds from operations, or FFO, payout ratio is the metric to watch. It also explains why companies can sometimes have payout ratios of more than 100% while still managing to pay their dividend, particularly when one-time noncash charges enter the picture.
At the end of the day, you simply need to be cognizant of the fact that dividend payments come out of cash flow and impact the cash flow statement. This means that a high payout ratio may not be as big a deal as it first seems. You need to dig deeper to find out if the dividend is truly at risk.
It's easy to love a high yield, but you can't forget about dividend growth. Inflation, or the rise in prices over time, eats into the purchasing power of money. If you buy a stock with a big yield, but no dividend growth, the buying power of the income you generate will actually decrease as the years go by. Since inflation grows at around 3% a year, historically speaking, it's a good idea to favor investments that can grow distributions by at least that amount, on average.

EPD DIVIDEND PER SHARE (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS.
If you can find higher growth rates, you'll be even better off. Take Enterprise Products Partners LP (NYSE:EPD), one of the largest, most diversified, and fiscally conservative midstream players in North America. It has historically grown its distribution by mid-single digits, leading the distribution to expand 65% over the past decade. Smaller, but similarly conservative, Magellan Midstream Partners LP (NYSE:MMP) has historically grown its dividend at a rate in the high single digits to low double digits. Over the past decade, its dividend has well more than doubled. Sometimes, owning a stock with a lower yield coupled with a higher dividend growth rate is better than buying the stock with the highest yield.
Of course, these five facts aren't all you need to know about dividend investing. But they provide an important grounding from which to start the process. Now that you know them, it's time to go back and look at your portfolio to make sure you have the best dividend stocks and haven't inadvertently drifted into higher-risk investments that won't be as rewarding over time as you had originally hoped. After that, you can apply this knowledge to new purchases to ensure your portfolio is filled with great, high-yield investment opportunities.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


