Although we don't believe in timing the market or panicking over daily movements, we do like to keep an eye on market changes -- just in case they're material to our investing thesis.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI) has soared to new record highs recently, and one of the most surprising things about this run is that the index's two energy stocks, ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and Chevron (NYSE:CVX), have played a big role in the rally. Given that West Texas Intermediate crude prices have fallen below $95 per barrel and are now at their lowest levels in more than four months, some investors are confused as to why Exxon and Chevron have risen, rather than plunged, in response.
A number of factors play into Exxon's and Chevron's relative success. Perhaps most important is the fact that both companies rely as much on the volume of oil and natural gas they produce as on the prices they get for selling them. Exxon pleased investors with its earnings report late last month because of its production growth, even though overall revenue actually dropped slightly. Chevron has driven its production levels upward as well, helping the oil giant boost revenue slightly in the third quarter.
Also, crude oil prices on world markets haven't fallen as far as domestic crude. Brent crude remains well above $100 per barrel, although it too is trading at its lowest levels since August -- below $105. The resulting spreads reemphasize just how much U.S. production has increased recently, as the U.S. prohibition against exporting crude oil prevents market forces from driving prices toward an equilibrium point.
Both Exxon and Chevron are integrated oil companies, so their fortunes aren't entirely tied to the price of oil. During the third quarter, narrowing spreads between Brent and WTI crude hurt margins in their respective refinery operations, as downstream profitability benefits when refineries are able to buy feedstock at discounted levels. The reemergence of the Brent-WTI spread more recently has lifted refinery stocks dramatically, and it could also help boost earnings in Exxon and Chevron's fourth-quarter reports.
Finally, you should also bear in mind is that energy-market participants have expected falling prices for a long time. Looking at WTI oil futures now, prices are expected to drop gradually in the coming years, to $85 by 2016 and $80 by 2019. As a result, even as prices have fallen over the past few months, they're nevertheless staying above the levels anticipated in coming years.
Add all these factors up, and you can understand why bullish investors haven't given up on Exxon or Chevron. If oil prices stay low in the long run, they'll eventually affect the two companies, but for now, investors haven't abandoned hope for their prospects.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


InterOil (NYSE: IOC) will release its quarterly report on Monday, and investors have grown increasingly impatient with the energy exploration company in recent months. With most shareholders expecting the company to come to a deal with oil and gas giant ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) to help InterOil cash in on its extensive natural gas reserves in Papua New Guinea, progress has been slow, and investors have to weigh the possibility that a deal with Exxon might never happen.
Investors have stuck by InterOil for so long because of the size of its Papua New Guinea assets, which have the potential to serve the energy needs of nearby China, India, and other Asian markets. But while many believed that the key to success was finding a way to move forward with its planned liquefied natural gas project, InterOil has changed gears and now appears to be relying more on Exxon for its sales strategy. Let's take an early look at what's been happening with InterOil over the past quarter and what we're likely to see in its report.
Stats on InterOil
Analyst EPS Estimate
($0.07)
Year-Ago EPS
$0.11
Revenue Estimate
$322.37 million
Change From Year-Ago Revenue
(1.4%)
Earnings Beats in Past 4 Quarters
2
SOURCE: YAHOO! FINANCE.
Will InterOil earnings recover without ExxonMobil?
Analysts have gotten a lot less optimistic in recent months about InterOil earnings, more than doubling their 2013 loss estimates and now expecting a loss in 2014 as well. The stock has struggled as well, falling 22% since early August.
Much of that decline came in August, when the company gave investors somewhat of a surprise in its earnings report. A bigger-than-expected loss weighed on InterOil's stock, but that paled in comparison to the strategic shifts that the company said it was contemplating. With new CEO Michael Hession saying that InterOil would put off plans to build its own LNG facility in favor of supplying ExxonMobil's rival facility, InterOil's profitability will rest entirely on its ability to negotiate a favorable deal with the oil giant.
Despite ongoing negotiations, InterOil hasn't announced a successful deal with Exxon since then. In fact, reports from late last month suggested that talks with Exxon have slowed, making it clear that InterOil does not have the upper hand in terms of its negotiating position. With its extensive financial resources, Exxon can afford to wait out InterOil if doing so will get it better terms.
InterOil isn't completely dependent on ExxonMobil, though. French energy company Total (NYSE:TOT) has explored for oil and gas in Papua New Guinea and might be interested in buying InterOil's assets. Moreover, Total could help InterOil move forward with its LNG plant if they agreed to work together.
In the InterOil earnings report, watch to see how the company describes the status of its talks. Finalizing a deal could send the stock soaring, but it's unclear how much longer investors will be willing to wait before seeing progress.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Click here to add InterOil to My Watchlist, which can find all of our Foolish analysis on it and all your other stocks.
