On Friday, Chevron (NYSE:CVX) will release its quarterly report, and investors have remained optimistic about the oil giant's long-term prospects. Like ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), BP (NYSE:BP), and other big oil companies, Chevron has had to work increasingly hard in order to make sure its production levels stay solid. But with Chevron having boosted its dividend by 7% on Wednesday afternoon, shareholders are wondering if they should take the payout raise as a sign that earnings will be better than expected.
Chevron's dividend increase represents the 27th straight year that the oil company has raised its quarterly payout. Yet even with the vote of confidence from Chevron's board, investors still have to worry about rising levels of competition and the higher base cost of new resources that require unconventional drilling methods to recover oil and gas. BP reported lower profits earlier this week, and ExxonMobil is expected to see similar declines. Can Chevron stay far enough ahead of the curve to keep both production and profits up? Let's take an early look at what's been happening with Chevron over the past quarter and what we're likely to see in its report.

Stats on Chevron
Analyst EPS Estimate
$2.51
Change From Year-Ago EPS
(21%)
Revenue Estimate
$54.47 billion
Change From Year-Ago Revenue
(4.1%)
Earnings Beats in Past 4 Quarters
1
SOURCE: YAHOO! FINANCE.
Can Chevron earnings finally recover this quarter?
Analysts have dramatically reduced their expectations on Chevron earnings in recent months, having cut first-quarter earnings estimates by almost 13% and lopping almost $0.75 per share from their full-year 2014 projections. The stock has still managed to rise by 9% since late January.
Chevron suffered mightily during the fourth quarter of 2013, with net income plunging 32% on a 7% drop in revenue. With falling spreads between prices of domestic and international oil, profits at its downstream refining segment fell 58%. Yet falling oil prices weighed on Chevron's upstream exploration and production segment as well, with a 29% decline in earnings from that division. The results sent the stock down more than 4% the day they were announced.
SOURCE: CHEVRON.
Chevron has also continued to see problems in the first quarter. Chevron issued a warning in early April, saying in its preliminary first-quarter outlook that oil and gas production and net income would both fall sequentially, with weather playing a role in the declines not only in North America but also in the Asian nation of Kazakhstan. Now, investors are concerned that even more favorable conditions in the oil market might not boost Chevron earnings.
Yet from a long-term perspective, Chevron seems to be making smart moves to sustain its business. Massive natural-gas finds in Australia give Chevron a strategically valuable source from which to transport liquefied natural gas to key markets in Asia and the Pacific, and with two big projects about 70% complete, Chevron should be able to move forward as soon as next year. Moreover, its long-term plans include a commitment to boost production capacity by 20%, keeping its annual capital expenditures stable in order to fund shale oil and deepwater drilling projects as well as its Kazakhstan partnership.
Chevron also won a major victory during the quarter, with a U.S. federal court striking down an Ecuadoran judgment that could have cost the company as much as $9.5 billion, even after judges in Ecuador had cut the original amount in half. With Chevron demonstrating that the judgment in Ecuador involved corrupt practices, the U.S. court refused to honor it, and that brought Chevron one step closer to putting the whole episode behind it.
In the Chevron earnings report, watch to see how the company deals with its production and cost challenges. If it can demonstrate an ability to reduce its cost structure while still sticking with its ambitious production-growth goals, Chevron could give competitors BP and ExxonMobil a run for their money -- and give its shareholders reason to celebrate above and beyond the dividend increase.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Click here to add Chevron to My Watchlist, which can find all of our Foolish analysis on it and all your other stocks.
The Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI) has been up and down on Wednesday, rising 15 points as of 12:30 p.m. EDT as investors weighed the fallout of a much weaker GDP figure than was expected and wondered whether the Federal Reserve might slow its tapering of quantitative easing at its policy meeting today. While most Dow components have already reported earnings, we'll get news from the energy sector tomorrow when ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) issues its quarterly report. The report should shed some light on the state of the energy industry, within the Dow and throughout the U.S., and how it compares with the conditions faced by BP (NYSE:BP) and other competitors.
ExxonMobil will report its results before the market opens tomorrow, with its earnings release expected at about 8 a.m. EDT based on past release times from previous quarters. The company has scheduled a conference call for 11 a.m. EDT, and comments there might well move the Dow Jones Industrials on a moment-to-moment basis.

Investors expect ExxonMobil to continue its trend of sluggish revenue and weak profit, with a double-digit decline in earnings per share possible compared to the year-ago quarter. Last quarter, the oil giant's downstream operations, which include refining and chemical manufacturing, weighed especially hard on Exxon's overall earnings. Although some of the factors that hurt the refining industry in the fourth quarter of 2013 have become more favorable, ExxonMobil can't necessarily count on a rebound in the downstream segment to pull up its overall results.
More critically, investors who follow the Dow Jones Industrials will want to see how successful ExxonMobil is at keeping its production levels moving higher. Finding economically viable sources of replacement reserves has been a long-term challenge for ExxonMobil, BP, and just about every major producer in the industry, especially as new finds increasingly involve major production challenges such as tough ultra-deepwater conditions or the need for innovative unconventional drilling methods.
SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL.
One element of the search is finding reserves in locations that don't have too much political risk. ExxonMobil will have to address the potential for problems in Russia, especially as tensions rise over the conflict in Ukraine. Exxon has a close relationship with Russian oil giant Rosneft and counts numerous projects, especially those involving the untapped assets off the northern coast of Russia in the Arctic Ocean, as being critical to its overall growth. Any sanctions or other penalties that hurt Exxon's ability to do business in Russia could have substantial long-term effects. It's also a huge issue for BP, which has a nearly 20% stake in Rosneft and also has to be concerned about retaliatory measures that Russian President Vladimir Putin might impose on the industry.
For Dow investors, ExxonMobil's above-average share price means the stock carries significant weight by itself. When you consider the impact that the energy industry has had on oil and gas producers, as well as the companies that provide them with essential materials and services, ExxonMobil's read on the sector could have wide-ranging effects throughout the Dow Jones Industrials.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


On Thursday, ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) will release its quarterly report, and investors aren't entirely sure what to make of the oil giant's prospects. Even though its shares have risen to new record highs, ExxonMobil faces not only the constant challenge of keeping its production levels but also geopolitical concerns about whether economic sanctions against Russia will lead to big problems for Exxon's business there. Moreover, as Chevron (NYSE:CVX), Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.A), and other global oil giants go around the world looking for the best prospective oilfields, Exxon faces increasing competition for prime assets that can do the most to help it replace production.
ExxonMobil and the oil industry in general is an interesting case study right now, as it still hasn't fully recovered from its boom times in the mid-2000s before the financial crisis. Oil hasn't approached the $150-per-barrel market ever since, and prices of crude in the U.S. have actually been depressed due to a lack of transportation infrastructure, regulations curtailing exports, and huge production increases from unconventional plays. Let's take an early look at what's been happening with ExxonMobil over the past quarter and what we're likely to see in its report.
SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL.
Stats on ExxonMobil
Analyst EPS Estimate
$1.88
Change From Year-Ago EPS
(11.3%)
Revenue Estimate
$109.76 billion
Change From Year-Ago Revenue
0.9%
Earnings Beats in Past 4 Quarters
2
SOURCE: YAHOO! FINANCE.
How well will ExxonMobil earnings fare this quarter?
In recent months, analysts have cut back on their views on Exxon earnings, cutting first-quarter estimates by 6% and taking $0.30 per share off their full-year 2014 projections. The stock, though, has risen, gaining 6% since late January.
ExxonMobil didn't start off the quarter on the best of notes, with its fourth-quarter earnings report sending shares down about 5% over the following week. Exxon saw earnings drop 16%, with its downstream operations weighing especially hard on its overall results, as the segment's profitability got cut nearly in half. Revenue fell by more than 3%, defying expectations for a smaller sales decline as oil-equivalent production volumes dropped by 1.8%.
The most disturbing thing about ExxonMobil's production challenges is that the company has paid ever-increasing capital expenditures in efforts to find new opportunities to raise production. Exxon's capex has grown by a third since 2010, while Chevron's has nearly doubled. Yet both companies have seen drops in net oil-equivalent production figures, reflecting the fact that ExxonMobil has had to consider higher-cost, less profitable alternatives that wouldn't have been economically viable under the lower-price conditions that prevailed in the early 2000s.
Still, ExxonMobil has pulled out all the stops trying to restart its growth engines. The company has started looking for ways to produce oil from oil shale, which the U.S. has in abundance. Yet Royal Dutch Shell and Chevron have both given up their attempts to reap economically viable oil from shale, and it's far from a certainty that ExxonMobil will find a successful method to tap its plentiful shale reserves. If it turns out that even oil prices above $100 per barrel can't make production viable, it's hard to foresee oil shale becoming important anytime in the near future.
Now, geopolitical tension has become a sticking point for ExxonMobil. Exxon has partnered with Russia's Rosneft to explore and drill shale deposits in western Siberia, as well as conduct offshore drilling activities in the Arctic Ocean and the Black Sea. With billions invested, though, Exxon faces an uncomfortable result if economic sanctions make what could be a $500 billion opportunity evaporate under political pressure.
In the ExxonMobil earnings report, listen for signs of how the company is addressing its Russian exposure while also looking for ways to boost production. With prices at comfortable levels, the key for Exxon is to take maximum advantage of those prices as long as they last -- and as long as the Russian threat doesn't turn into anything more serious than it already is.



Before you consider Royal Dutch Shell plc, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Royal Dutch Shell plc wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Click here to add ExxonMobil to My Watchlist, which can find all of our Foolish analysis on it and all your other stocks.
