Shares of medical products veteran Johnson & Johnson (NYSE:JNJ) come with a household name, decades of proven success, and a 2.4% dividend yield. The stock is popular among income investors, and for good reason. But there are many alternatives on the market with even richer yields and equally unassailable business models.
We asked a few of your fellow investors here at The Motley Fool to share dividend ideas that could offer better yields than Johnson & Johnson for the long haul. Read on to see why our panelists would prefer to put Archer Daniels Midland (NYSE:ADM), Procter & Gamble (NYSE:PG), or ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) in their dividend portfolios right now.
WITH INCOME STOCKS LIKE THESE, IT'S EASY TO RELAX. IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Tyler Crowe (ExxonMobil): Finding a stock with a dividend yield greater than Johnson & Johnson's is actually a piece of cake. There are at least a thousand companies out there with a dividend yield higher than 2.36%. The greater challenge is finding a stock that has a higher yield and can provide the long-term dividend growth and stability that Johnson & Johnson's stock has provided investors. It may not have a 55-year history of dividend increases under its belt, but ExxonMobil's 35-year streak of dividend increases and a 3.7% yield is one worth considering.
One thing that adds to the impressiveness of ExxonMobil's dividend streak is that it has been able to achieve this in the highly cyclical business of oil and gas. Over those 35 years, we have experienced four epic oil price crashes (1980-1986, 1998, 2008-2009, 2014-2016). Thanks to ExxonMobil's vertically integrated business model and management's insistence on investing through the ups and downs of the commodity cycle, the company has been able to produce steady cash flows that fuel that growing dividend payment.
Even though oil prices are much lower than they were just a few years ago, management has responded by lowering the price at which it can break even. Today, management estimates that its current operations are free-cash-flow positive when oil prices are as low as $40 a barrel. With low-cost operations like that, it should be able to keep growing its dividend for some time with little fear for low oil prices.
Demitri Kalogeropoulos (Procter & Gamble): Like Johnson & Johnson, Procter & Gamble is the dominant force in its industry. Through hit brands like Gillette, Tide, and Bounty, the consumer goods titan claims 65% of worldwide sales of razors and blades, 25% of the market for fabric care, and 40% of the U.S. paper towel niche.
To be sure, P&G's growth outlook isn't as strong as the healthcare giant's. Organic revenue is set to rise by just 2% this fiscal year, and that would count as a win in the sluggish consumer products industry. Johnson & Johnson, on the other hand, posted a double-digit sales gain in the most recent quarter thanks to a big assist from its pharmaceuticals business.
In exchange for that more modest growth profile, P&G shareholders get a meaty 3% dividend yield along with a decent chance at better returns ahead. After all, the company should improve on its expansion pace now that its portfolio is focused on just its strongest brands. Executives are still finding room to slash costs and increase efficiency, too, even after removing more than $10 billion of expenses over the past five years. Assuming P&G can end its stubborn two-year streak of market share losses, those savings promise to fund faster dividend growth for patient income investors.
Anders Bylund (Archer Daniels Midland): This maker of food ingredients, biofuels, and feedstock has mastered the fine art of thriving in a brutally competitive market of commodity products. That's no mean feat.
At 3.2%, Archer Daniels Midland's dividend yield easily tops Johnson & Johnson's 2.4%. The company is also a true-blue dividend aristocrat, having raised its payouts without interruption for the last 41 years. Moreover, only 52% of Archer Daniels Midland's free cash flows are being funneled into dividend checks these days, leaving plenty of room for further payout boosts.
That cash comes from a finely tuned cash machine, where operating margins in the low single digits tap into enormous sales volumes. Over the last four quarters, Archer Daniels Midland collected top-line revenues of $61.3 billion as a leading global provider of ingredients based on corn and oilseed grains.
It may not be an exciting business, but it's a tremendously secure one. Not even the droughts of 2012 managed to drive the company's profit margins below the break-even point. And the dividend increases just kept coming.
All things considered, Archer Daniels Midland's dividends are both generous and safe. Invest here if you want to sleep easy every night.



Before you consider Johnson & Johnson, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Johnson & Johnson wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Here's something crazy to consider. In 2017, the average price per barrel of Brent crude oil -- the international benchmark price -- is up more than 15%. At the same time, though, the oil and gas industry as a whole is one of the worst-performing sectors this year. If that sounds odd to you, you aren't the only one. While there are some reasons this may be the case -- domestic crude prices are only up 6% over the same time frame -- it is still hard to imagine that the industry as a whole would suffer when the price of its most precious commodity has risen so much.
With this in mind, it seems like it's a good time for investors to start digging into the oil and gas industry for possible stock ideas. So, we asked three of our investing contributors which stocks they like right now. Here's why they picked Diamondback Energy (NASDAQ:FANG), ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), and Transocean (NYSE:RIG).
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Sean O'Reilly (Diamondback Energy): What a difference a year makes. Last Thanksgiving, OPEC finally relented and cut production in an attempt to balance the oil market. The cartel even moved to extend production cuts through the end of 2018. This landmark reversal, made in partnership with Russia, marks a tectonic shift. The sun may be about to shine on the oil industry once again. And that makes hyperefficient oil companies like Diamondback Energy compelling investments today.
Diamondback is one of the major players in the Permian Basin of West Texas. This particularly fertile geologic basin has been a favorite of the oil industry. Its proximity to the Port of Houston, and its bountiful, low-cost reserves, make it "ground zero" of the shale revolution. Diamondback is not only one of the most prominent owners of oil leases there, but is one of the lowest-cost producers. Over the past three years, Diamondback has cut its cash operating expenses per barrel of production by over 35%. On average, it can now produce a barrel of oil for less than $9.
Diamondback Energy will be one of the biggest beneficiaries of an oil rebound. While many have been selling assets and cutting costs to survive, Diamondback has used the past four years to expand. It has done so by buying up assets and focusing on reducing costs; Diamondback could not have managed the energy downturn of the last four years any better.
With its stock at just 18 times forward earnings estimates, and with industry-leading efficiency, Diamondback Energy is a fantastic oil stock to buy this December.
Reuben Gregg Brewer (ExxonMobil Corporation): Shares of integrated energy giant Exxon are down around 7% so far this year. Many of its peers, on the other hand, are up for the year, some in the low double digits. But it's not like Exxon is suddenly struggling. In fact, it's doing just fine, with third-quarter earnings of $0.93 a share. But that's really par for the course; while many of Exxon's competitors were bleeding red ink during the oil downturn, this industry giant remained in the black.
Now that oil prices have risen from their lows to above the $50-per-barrel level, Exxon looks like it's being left behind. However, there have been no material fundamental changes at the company, and investors seem to be overlooking growth opportunities like its efforts in the Permian Basin and offshore Guyana. In fact, at this point, Exxon is trading near its lowest ratio of price to tangible net worth in roughly a decade.
Meanwhile, Exxon was one of the few oil companies to manage through the energy downturn with its streak of annual dividend increases intact (it's now up to 35 years). It also maintains one of the least leveraged balance sheets, with long-term debt at just 12% (or so) of the capital structure. And while peers are starting to close the gap with regard to return on invested capital, it's still at the high end of the group. Exxon looks cheap today, but I don't expect that to last as investors realize that this industry stalwart continues to perform at the top of its game.
BRENT CRUDE OIL SPOT PRICE DATA BY YCHARTS.
Tyler Crowe (Transocean): Even though the oil and gas industry has been slowly recovering over the past year or so, much of the recovery has happened in North American shale. At current prices, companies can at least break even, and in some cases make a respectable return. This has spurred an uptick in spending for land drilling, and all the associated services and equipment for this particular part of the market.
Outside land drilling, there hasn't been much progress. Even though some companies are learning how to develop offshore sources for less money and faster than ever before, offshore fields still tie up lots of capital over several years -- money that could go to projects that can return capital much faster.
As much as this trend has held for a few years, chances are it won't last forever. The North American shale industry can't singlehandedly offset global production decline and underinvestment. Eventually, producers will find a price range where spending on offshore developments is once again lucrative.
When that time comes, Transocean will be one of the companies producers turn to for an offshore drilling rig. Throughout this downturn in offshore activity, the company has undertaken an incredible fleet turnover program to shed itself of older, less capable rigs. As a result, a vast majority of Transocean's fleet is designed to handle either the deepest drilling waters or the harsh environments of the North Sea and Arctic regions. These rigs command higher service rates and higher margins, and Transocean has a lot of them ready to deploy --and the balance sheet to ride out the middle to late innings of this industry downturn.
What makes Transocean's stock so compelling is the fact that it trades so cheap. At a price-to-tangible-book-value ratio of only 0.3, the market is pricing shares for pennies on the dollar of its underlying assets. Wall Street's fear here is that the anticipated recovery may never materialize. That isn't inconceivable, but the possible returns that would come from a recovery make this a high-reward stock worth a deeper dive.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


