In this corner...the largest oil company in the world! 
In the opposite corner...also the largest oil company in the world!
Today, it's a clash of the titans of the oil industry. I'm pitting ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), the biggest oil and gas company in the world by market cap, against Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.A)(NYSE:RDS.B), the biggest oil and gas company in the world by revenue. Both are massive companies...and also massive underperformers.  Over the last five years, both stocks have lost more than half their value. So let's try to figure out which one is the better buy today. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Let's lead off with one of the longtime bright spots of Big Oil: dividends.
Probably the most significant piece of recent news from either company is Shell's late-April announcement that it was cutting its dividend by two-thirds, down to just $0.32/ADR share. This surprise move, the company's first dividend cut since World War II, took Shell from being the highest yielder among the five oil majors to the lowest. Its share price tumbled in response. Once the dust settled, Shell was yielding just 4.4%. 
That's a far cry from Exxon's current 8.3% yield, but the big question is whether Exxon might follow in Shell's footsteps and slash its own dividend sometime in the near future. Today's low oil prices mean most (if not all) oil production is unprofitable right now. That means Exxon is going to have to take on substantial debt to keep its dividend fully funded. Indeed, in the first quarter of 2020, the company added $13 billion of debt to its balance sheet (although its total debt load of $59.6 billion is still much lower than Shell's $95.1 billion).
Exxon is currently a Dividend Aristocrat that has upped its payout annually for the last 37 straight years, and that's a big draw for investors. CEO Darren Woods knows it, too, saying on the Q1 2020 earnings call: "[I]f you look at our shareholder base, about 70% of them are retail or long-term investors that look for our dividend and see that as an important source of stability in their income. And so we have a strong commitment to that." Shell, meanwhile, hadn't increased its dividend in five years. 
While Woods hasn't said outright that he won't cut the dividend -- no CEO would ever make such a rigid pronouncement -- he emphasized over and over again on the earnings call that the company's priority is to offer a "reliable, growing dividend" (he used the phrase multiple times). Since it seems like ExxonMobil is likely to go to great lengths to preserve its Dividend Aristocrat status, it wins this category.
Winner: ExxonMobil
The main problem for ExxonMobil and Shell in the near term are the low prices for oil, natural gas, and refined products. Global oversupply combined with a lack of demand due to coronavirus-related declines in fuel consumption have hit both companies hard. One company, though, seems to have been hit harder than the other. 
Obviously, the two companies have different portfolios, so it isn't an exact apples-to-apples comparison. But we can look at how each one fared in Q1 2020, as the coronavirus pandemic was just beginning, and compare it to their past performance to get a sense of which one's operations are more resilient.
Here again, ExxonMobil seems to beat Shell. Exxon posted a wider Q1 net loss than Shell, but much of that was due to noncash writedowns on the value of the company's oil inventories. Shell's Q1 revenue was down 28.3% from the prior-year quarter, compared to just an 11.6% decline for Exxon. Similarly, adjusted net income, which strips out those inventory writedowns and other special items, fell much further year-over-year for Shell (down 47.2% compared to ExxonMobil's 4.1%). 
Shell's Q1 operating cash flow seems to blast Exxon's out of the water, $14.9 billion to $6.3 billion, but when you exclude working capital changes -- which strips out a $9.6 billion inventory decrease on Shell's part -- the numbers are nearly identical: $7.3 billion for ExxonMobil and $7.4 billion for Shell. 
Of course, this was in a quarter in which the average per-barrel price of Brent Crude was $50; in the second quarter, that price has ranged from the high teens to the low $30s. Plus, both companies are in the process of making big cuts to their capital and operational budgets, which could benefit one company's finances more than the other. However, based on their Q1 performance, Exxon seems better positioned to weather the current downturn.
Winner: ExxonMobil
ExxonMobil looks to be better situated than Shell in terms of dividend and ability to weather the current crisis, plus it currently has a lower debt load. ExxonMobil is the better buy. 
However, the oil sector is a total mess right now, with low prices, lack of available storage, and reduced demand all conspiring to create an industrywide catastrophe that's not going to vanish overnight. Both Exxon and Shell are probably looking at years of underperformance ahead. Dividend investors may want to consider buying in, but other investors should probably steer clear of both companies for now. 



Before you consider Royal Dutch Shell plc, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Royal Dutch Shell plc wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Being an investor over the past three months has been challenging. The panic created by the spread of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) wound up pushing the benchmark S&P 500 to its fastest bear market in history, with the index taking just 17 sessions to lose more than 20% of its value. All told, the S&P 500 lost 34% of its value in 33 calendar days before retracing as much as 60% of its losses.
The near term continues to remain bleak, with more than 36 million Americans filing for initial unemployment benefits over the past eight weeks, and the official unemployment rate likely to rival the highest unemployment rate in U.S. history of 25%, set during the Great Depression. With no clear-cut end to COVID-19 in sight, uncertainty is still the name of the game.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The thing about uncertainty is that it opens the door for opportunistic investors, allowing them to scoop up exceptional companies at discounted prices. Even though we may not know when the stock market will bottom or how low the indexes will go, we do know that every stock market correction in history was eventually put into the rearview mirror by a bull market rally. Nothing is a given on Wall Street, but that's as close to a guarantee as you're going to get.
Where should investors be looking for great stocks right now? As crazy as this might sound, the iconic Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI) might be a smart place to scour for value stocks. Although the Dow Jones has its flaws as an index, it's still home to 30 outstanding multinational businesses that are all time-tested. That means they know how to get through a bear market and possible recession.
What's more, you don't need to be a millionaire to make money by investing in Dow components. With most brokerages eliminating commissions for stocks purchased and sold on major U.S. exchanges, and some even allowing fractional-share purchases, any amount is the right amount to get started. If, say, you have $4,000 in disposable income that you won't need to pay bills or for your emergency fund, consider investing it into these extremely cheap Dow stocks.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
There's little question that the next year or two could be challenging for bank stocks. The federal funds rate is liable to be held at record lows by the Federal Reserve, and delinquency rates on various types of loans will likely rise as stimulus money dries up. But that's no reason for investors to overlook a bargain with JPMorgan Chase (NYSE:JPM).
What's really interesting about JPMorgan is that it's been able to grow its business on two fronts. Most banks are focusing a lot on their digital and mobile banking operations -- and rightly so, since digital banking results in a significantly lower transactional cost to a bank than an in-person transaction. To this end, JPMorgan Chase has grown its active mobile base to 38.2 million users, as of the end of March, up from 34.4 million in the year-ago period. 
But JPMorgan is also growing its physical presence. Last year, it opened a couple of dozen new branches in what it perceives to be underbanked markets of the United States. Most of the company's peers are closing their branches to cut operating expenses, so this gives JPMorgan yet another opportunity to grow its consumer banking business.
Currently, investors can pick up a share of JPMorgan Chase for just 13% above its book value. That's its cheapest valuation relative to book since the end of 2015, and the perfect catalyst to get value investors to buy this cheap Dow stock.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
While far from a popular pick, oil and gas giant ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) also looks to be a cheap Dow stock that long-term-oriented investors can consider scooping up.
Similar to JPMorgan Chase, there are going to be some very clear hurdles the company will need to deal with in the near term. This includes a substantive build-up in domestic reserves and the very real possibility of another coronavirus flare-up in the U.S. or abroad that could absolutely ravage oil demand for a second time. Thankfully, ExxonMobil has a few tricks up its sleeve.
First of all, it's an integrated oil and gas company, with the key word being "integrated." Though the bulk of its growth and profitability typically come from its upstream operations (drilling and exploration), it also possesses refineries and petrochemical operations that benefit when crude prices fall. These downstream operations are able to buy at a lower input cost and take advantage of what's often higher demand when crude prices fall.
Secondly, ExxonMobil has levers it can pull in the cost department. It's already reduced its 2020 capital expenditures by as much as $10 billion (the previous forecast called for $30 billion to $33 billion in spending), and could, as a last resort, reduce or shelve its dividend to save almost $15 billion a year.
With ExxonMobil now trading just below its book value, yet keeping key growth projects like (Payara in Guyana) in sight, it looks like one heck of a value play.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
A final Dow stock that looks too cheap to pass up is pharmacy-chain giant Walgreens Boots Alliance (NASDAQ:WBA).
Even though Walgreens is a healthcare stock, it's not been completely immune to the effects of COVID-19. For instance, even though sales increased in the company's fiscal second quarter, likely due to consumers stocking up on goods prior to stay-at-home orders being issued in their respective states, there's clear concern that shoppers might stay at home during much of the third quarter, which could be a drag on earnings. Nevertheless, focusing on these very short-term concerns would be a mistake.
One thing Walgreens has going in its favor is long-term trends. Front-end retail sales, while meaningful to total sales, don't account for much in the margin column. Walgreens' bread and butter will be growing its pharmacy segment. To that end, it's well-positioned to take advantage of an aging population with growing access to medical care, and it has been working hard with drug suppliers to lower its expenses. Over time, we should see steady sales and margin expansion for the company's pharmacy operations.
Furthermore, Walgreens Boots Alliance has placed an increasing emphasis on service to drive repeat business and reduce its operating costs. The company's digital Find Care marketplace drew 2 million visits, an increase of 40% from the previous quarter, while website Boots.com delivered 23% year-over-year sales growth. Walgreens understands that convenience is what'll drive repeat business. 
Investors can pick up shares of Walgreens Boots Alliance for about 6.5 times its forward price-to-earnings ratio and just 5 times its cash flow. Both figures are less than half of its five-year average forward P/E and price-to-cash-flow ratios. It's quite the bargain.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


