Tuesday was a momentous occasion for the stock market, as some of the most visible market benchmarks rose to record levels. The Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI) topped the 30,000 mark for the first time ever, while the S&P 500 (SNPINDEX:^GSPC) also set a new closing high. Even the Nasdaq Composite (NASDAQINDEX:^IXIC), which had been quicker to set new records earlier in 2020, finished just shy of its high-water mark.
Index
Percentage Change
Point Change
Dow
+1.54%
+455
S&P 500
+1.62%
+58
Nasdaq Composite
+1.31%
+156
DATA SOURCE: YAHOO! FINANCE.
Yet when you look closely at how the stock market fared, a couple of sectors really stand out. Energy stocks were the best performers overall, climbing on hopes that a coming end to the coronavirus crisis could spur a return to more normal levels of energy use. But with energy now making up a relatively small portion of the overall stock market, the gains in financial stocks had even more influence in spurring investors to more optimistic viewpoints.
It's easy to understand what drove energy stocks higher. Crude oil prices jumped 4% on Tuesday, flirting with the $45 per barrel level. Oil markets are looking closely at a possible recovery in demand if the COVID-19 pandemic gets resolved through recent advances in vaccine and treatment options. That lifted the Energy Select Sector SPDR (NYSEMKT:XLE) more than 5%.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Players across the spectrum did well. Major oil giants got a nice boost, with ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) climbing 7%. Refinery stocks continued to claw back ground lost earlier in the year, with Valero Energy (NYSE:VLO) leading the way with a 4% rise. And oilfield services stocks like Halliburton (NYSE:HAL) were also up on the prospects for exploration and production companies boosting back up their activity levels and needing more materials and services in 2021 and beyond.
The major assumption behind the COVID-19 investing thesis is that when energy demand rises, it will go toward fossil fuels. That seems increasingly in question, especially with the huge rise in interest in electric vehicles and renewable energy more broadly. Nevertheless, in the short run, optimism in the oil patch could send traditional energy stocks considerably higher.
The financial sector didn't do quite as well as energy, with the Financial Select Sector SPDR (NYSEMKT:XLF) rising 3.5%. But with financial institutions carrying much higher total market capitalizations than energy stocks right now, the gain had a bigger influence on the stock market at large.
Big banks performed the best in lifting the sector. Among retail players, Bank of America (NYSE:BAC) led the way higher with a nearly 6% gain, while JPMorgan Chase (NYSE:JPM) weighed in with a rise of nearly 5%. On the investment side, Morgan Stanley (NYSE:MS) had a healthy gain of 5.5%.
Yet there were also gains elsewhere. Insurance conglomerate Berkshire Hathaway (NYSE:BRK.A) (NYSE:BRK.B) added to its recent run with a 2% gain, while fund giant BlackRock (NYSE:BLK) rose almost 2.5%.
Banks would benefit greatly from additional economic stimulus from the federal government, and that's looking more likely in the coming months. Meanwhile, the sector has gotten beaten down badly throughout 2020, and that has value investors chomping at the bit to reap the rewards of a bounce.
It's easy to look at high-profile tech stocks as driving markets higher. But when you look more closely, you'll often find pockets of strength in places you wouldn't otherwise notice. It's important for investors to keep that in mind as they look for the best investments for 2021.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Oil prices are bounding higher on Tuesday, with WTI, the leading U.S. oil benchmark price, surging more than 4% to nearly $45 a barrel by 10:45 a.m. EST on Tuesday. That pushed WTI to its highest level since August. Fueling the rally in oil prices was news this week that a third vaccine against COVID-19 had an efficacy rate of up to 90% in a late-stage clinical trial. That's driving optimism that the global economy can quickly normalize in the coming months, which would drive up demand for crude oil. 
The surge in oil prices is propelling oil stocks today. Industry behemoths ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP) both rallied more than 5% in early-morning trading. Meanwhile, shares of smaller oil producers like Apache (NASDAQ:APA), Centennial Resource Development (NASDAQ:CDEV), and QEP Resources (NYSE:QEP) all surged more than 10% at one point on Tuesday. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The COVID-19 outbreak has had a devastating impact on oil demand this year because it shut down large swaths of the global economy. That had a significant effect on the oil market, forcing OPEC into a historic agreement to curb production. That pact helped stabilized the oil market, giving demand time to recover. While consumption remains well below its prepandemic peak, it could accelerate in 2021 as vaccines start slowing the spread of the virus, giving people more freedom to travel for work and leisure. That would likely push crude prices up even further, boosting oil company cash flows. 
Exxon needs higher oil prices to balance its expected cash outlays next year with its projected cash flows. According to one analyst, the company faces an $8 billion shortfall in funding its dividend and capital spending in 2021 under the assumption that WTI averages $47 a barrel. However, at $55 a barrel, the company would be in a much better position to fund its dividend and grow its production and cash flow. 
ConocoPhillips is already in a solid position, even more so after agreeing to acquire rival Concho Resources. That deal keeps its average supply cost below $30 a barrel, which has it on track to generate significant free cash flow if oil prices continue improving. That would enable the company to repurchase more shares or pay special dividends with the excess cash. 
Meanwhile, smaller producers like Apache, Centennial Resource Development, and QEP Resources are in a similar boat as Exxon. They need higher oil prices to generate the cash flow required to support their operations. Apache only expects to invest $1 billion or less on capital projects next year if oil prices are at $40 a barrel, which would impact its ability to grow production. Centennial needs higher oil prices to boost its cash flow after its liquidity almost ran dry earlier this year when prices plunged. Finally, like Centennial, one of QEP Resources' main objectives in recent months has been staying afloat by paying off debt. If oil prices keep rallying, these producers will have more cash to fund new drilling and shore up their financial situations. 
There's growing optimism that we're near the beginning of the end of this pandemic. That's fueling the belief that the global economy can return to normal in the coming months. That would drive oil demand higher, likely taking crude prices up with it. Those higher prices would help cure what ails most oil companies as they need further improvement to generate more cash to fund development programs, dividends, and debt retirement.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


