Global integrated energy giant ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) is investing heavily in new oil production. That's going against the grain today with low oil prices and Wall Street increasingly pushing oil companies to pull back on their spending plans. The thing is, Exxon thinks it has some really great opportunities ahead of it, and it doesn't want to slow down. Its drilling in offshore Guyana, for example, is an incredible opportunity that's only just starting to show results. Here's what you need to know about this deepwater project.
Exxon intends to spend up to $35 billion a year on its capital investment plans through 2025. The weak oil and natural gas price environment hasn't deterred it from this goal, with CEO Darren Woods explaining during Exxon's fourth-quarter 2019 earnings conference call that, "We believe strongly that investing in the trough of this cycle has some real advantages as the industry has pulled back, projects costs come down resulting in lower cost of capacity additions. They are then available to catch the cycle upswing. This is a win-win, capturing high margins at a lower cost." 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
Clearly, Exxon is willing to buck the wider trend of energy companies pulling back on their drilling efforts. On the other side of the equation, for example, Chevron is happily touting the fact that it is spending less, relative to its cash flow, than any of its oil major peers. And some companies in the upstream space haven't actually been given much of a choice on pulling back, as weak finances and low oil prices have combined to push a number of smaller players into bankruptcy court. 
Exxon would likely see these things as net positives, based on its long-term outlook. And, notably, it has the financial strength to keep spending even when times are tough, with a financial-debt-to-equity ratio of around 0.15 times or so. The biggest news on the drilling front so far has been the energy giant's production growth in the U.S. onshore space, which increased 79% year over year in 2019. And there's still years and years worth of growth ahead for this region, too. But there was another important development in 2019 that investors need to look at: Guyana.
Exxon first discovered oil off the shore of Guyana in 2015. It owns roughly 45% of this project, with Hess Corporation controlling 30% and Nexen Petroleum Guyana Limited the remainder. After a second discovery in the region, Exxon and its partners made the decision to start a long-term development project. At the time, in 2017, the company believed there were roughly two billion oil equivalent barrels in the find. 
At the end of 2019 Exxon announced that Guyana production had finally started, with the goal of pulling up around 120,000 barrels of oil from the project on a daily basis. That, however, is just the start. Deepwater oil projects like this take years to fully develop, and a lot has happened between 2015 and 2020. 

XOM DATA BY YCHARTS
For example, Exxon made four discoveries in 2017 in offshore Guyana, five in 2018, and another five in 2019. In early 2020 it announced yet another successful discovery, bringing the total to 16! When the company announced the most recent find, meanwhile, it added two billion barrels of oil equivalents to the total expected from the project. That's as much as the first two finds that led to the investment decision, and brings the new total oil reserve estimate for the project to a massive eight billion barrels -- four times what it was in 2017. That update, by the way, doesn't include the most recent discovery, which will be added to the total at a later date. 
So while production in Guyana has only just started, there's a huge opportunity for Exxon and its partners. In fact, the 120,000 barrels a day is expected to increase more than three times over by 2023 when the oil giant has just three wells in operation. It doesn't currently spell out the growth after that, but it is already making plans to develop more wells in Guyana, which could bring production to between 700,000 and 800,000 barrels a day by 2025. 
Clearly this is a big deal for Exxon, and will help to drive production results over the next few years. Add it to the growth in the onshore U.S. space and the company is achieving a great deal of success today. Exxon can't control the price of oil and natural gas, but it is proving to investors that it can execute on big projects as it looks to live up to its production growth plans.
It's hard to love Exxon right now, noting that heavy spending while oil prices are low is not something Wall Street is happy to see. That said, if you can think long-term along with Exxon's management team, the success it is having with its drilling efforts looks likely to set up a multi-year upswing in production growth. Right now that's not a good thing, but if CEO Woods is right about the long-term supply/demand dynamics, it could eventually lead to a big payday for the company and its investors.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Dividend stocks can be a portfolio's best friend. They can help boost good returns and prevent or offset losses during times like these, when the markets have turned red. Having some dividend stocks in your portfolio is a good way to protect yourself against a downturn, and National Health Investors (NYSE:NHI), Apple (NASDAQ:AAPL), and ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) can give investors some great diversification.
National Health Investors is a low-volatility stock that can be a great pick for investors who want to avoid the market's wild rides. One of the reasons it can provide stability is that the real estate investment trust (REIT) invests in healthcare properties and has a portfolio made up of nursing facilities, specialty hospitals, assisted-care communities, and many other healthcare-oriented properties. Through 36 operating partners across the country, National Health has a portfolio of 238 properties spanning 34 states.
Not only does that make National Health a diversified investment, it means the company can benefit from recurring income, which helps minimize the chance that sales will be down. National Health's revenue has nearly tripled in recent years, from $118 million in 2013 to $318 million in 2019. And with operating margins typically about 70%, National Health has had no problem posting profits along the way.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
REIT investors also often look at a company's funds from operations (FFO), which can be more indicative of a REIT's true performance, because the calculation doesn't include non-cash items like amortization. In 2019, National Health's FFO was $239.7 million, up 6.2% from the prior year. 
On Feb. 19, the company announced it would be increasing its quarterly dividend to $1.10, for a bump up of 5% from its most recent payment. It's the 11th straight year that National Health has hiked its payouts, and the dividend now yields more than 5% per year.
Apple is an easy pick for investors who want a stock they can hang on to for many years. Sitting on cash of more than $100 billion, the iPhone maker is in an ideal situation to do whatever it wants to fund more growth. The fact that it relies more on services and recurring revenue makes Apple a safer and more appealing stock than an unknown or up-and-coming tech company. 
The company's financials are strong, with Apple netting a profit margin of at least 18% in each of the past 10 quarters. And although sales were down in fiscal 2019, the launch of its Apple+ streaming service could turn things around this year. 
Currently, Apple pays a dividend of $0.77 every quarter, which yields a little over 1% per year. It's a nominal amount, well below the S&P 500 average of 2%. However, with the company increasing dividend payments since 2013, there's potential for it to become much higher in the future. 
ExxonMobil is an attractive buy because the stock could be a steal. Although it's down 24% in the past three months, the company is still performing fairly well. In its year-end results released Jan. 31, Exxon's adjusted earnings per share of $0.41 fell just shy of analyst expectations of $0.43. Revenue of $67.2 billion, however, came in well above the Wall Street forecasts of $64.2 billion. 
Exxon's margins aren't as high as Apple's, but the oil and gas giant has had no trouble staying in the black over the years. The Texas-based company is more than 100 years old and has a market cap of more than $200 billion. The company produces and exports crude oil and natural gas all over the world, and a lot of its struggles can be traced to poor oil prices, which are down in recent months on concerns about travel as a result of the COVID-19 coronavirus outbreak and SARS-CoV-2, the novel coronavirus causing the illness. The price of West Texas Intermediate crude oil fell below $50 in February for the first time since January 2019. 
The last time Exxon's stock was trading this low was back in 2005, and that could make it an attractive opportunity for investors to buy on the dip and lock in a solid yield. It's the only dividend aristocrat on this list, having raised its payouts by an average of 6.2% each year for 37 straight years. Currently, the company pays its shareholders $0.87 every quarter for each share they own, for an annual yield of 6.7%.
Here's a quick snapshot of how the three stocks' returns look over the past three years:

DATA BY YCHARTS.
National Health's lack of share appreciation may turn off investors looking for more than just a dividend, but its minimal price movement means it's a great place to let your money sit and earn 5% per year. But for investors who value a high yield, Exxon can be an appealing buy -- as long as you're OK with seeing red and aren't in a hurry to pull out your money. Exxon still looks like a solid long-term investment, but it's not suitable for risk-averse investors.
Apple is an underdog dividend stock, and its small dividend yield could look a lot different years from now. Buying the stock today, as its payouts are still growing, may be a good position to stake out. If you're willing to wait for the dividend to continue increasing, this has the potential to be the best dividend stock of the three.



Before you consider Apple Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Apple Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


