When it comes to energy businesses, ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and BP (NYSE:BP) sit in rare company. To call them industry giants would be an understatement. However, the two stocks have seen widely divergent performance since early 2016, when oil prices started to recover from a deep downturn. BP's 38% stock advance has trounced Exxon's sideways run. However, with oil back in a bear market again, it's worth re-examining Exxon and BP to see which would be the better buy today.
After oil prices started to crater in mid-2014, eventually falling below $30 a barrel, BP focused on cutting costs. That's basically what every major oil producer was doing. At this point, the company believes it can cover its operating expenses and dividend with oil around the $50-per-barrel level. The goal, however, is to keep pushing the break-even point lower, hitting the $35 to $40 range by 2021.   
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
That's good news, since Brent crude prices recently fell from over $80 a barrel to $60 in roughly two months. BP's shares have fallen about 14% over that span, which is hardly a surprise. Exxon's shares, by comparison, were down around 10%. The key takeaway here is that oil prices will continue to be a major factor in BP's financial and stock performance. But they aren't the only factor.
While successfully cutting costs, BP has also been executing well on the production front. Production rose 10% in 2017, with continued gains in 2018. Production, for example, was up 7% year over year in the third quarter. And with the recent acquisition of U.S. land assets from BHP, it should continue its upward march.   
What about leverage? At the end of the third quarter, long-term debt made up around 35% of the capital structure, which is a reasonable figure even though the company's leverage is toward the high end of its oil major peers. And even if the entire $10.5 billion BHP deal, which closed after the quarter ended, were funded with debt, leverage would only rise to around 39% of the capital structure. That's easily manageable so long as oil doesn't crater again.   

BP PRICE TO TANGIBLE BOOK VALUE DATA BY YCHARTS.
BP is, basically, in pretty good shape today. That said, investors have taken notice. The company's price to tangible book value is historically low, but materially higher than it was during the worst of the 2014 oil downturn. That, however, highlights the crux of the issue when comparing BP and Exxon.
Exxon hasn't been executing nearly as well as BP. One of the biggest differences has been on the production front. Exxon's production fell 1% in 2016 and another 1.7% in 2017. It has continued to decline in 2018, with year-over-year production off 2% in the third quarter.   
Investors have taken notice, which helps explain why Exxon's shares have gone nowhere for nearly three years. But the weak stock performance presents an opportunity, because Exxon's price to tangible book value is now lower than it has been since the mid-1990s (and lower than BP's). The company's 4.1% dividend yield, meanwhile, is higher than it has been since about that same time period.

XOM DIVIDEND YIELD (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS.
That said, Exxon's dividend yield is lower than the 6% yield BP is offering, which might entice income investors to lean toward BP. However, Exxon has a much more impressive dividend history, with 36 consecutive dividend increases behind it. By comparison, BP cut its dividend in 2010 following the Gulf of Mexico disaster and held it steady following the oil drop in mid-2014. It only started to increase the dividend again in 2018. Another material oil downturn, when considering BP's leverage, would likely lead management to hold the line on the dividend again. Exxon easily has the edge here despite the lower yield if dividend growth and consistency are important to you. 
A historically low valuation and high yield, however, aren't that compelling if Exxon's production keeps heading south. But that doesn't appear to be in the cards. For starters, Exxon has material plans to boost production over the long term, including investments in onshore U.S. oil, offshore oil, and natural gas. To management's credit, it is focused on profitable production and not quick fixes (as the last 2.5 years clearly shows). However, there was a notable shift on this front in the third quarter: Exxon's production rose 5.5% sequentially between the second and third quarters on the strength of its onshore U.S. operations. That's just one of the company's key production growth initiatives and suggests that management's long-term plans are starting to pan out.   
Moreover, Exxon's long-term debt is only around 10% of its capital structure. Even if oil prices fall, it can afford to support its investments and grow the dividend, like it did during the last downturn. And while Exxon doesn't really discuss break-even points, it projects that it will be able to increase earnings by 35% by 2025 even if oil falls to $40 per barrel. The downside risk here seems pretty limited.     
Effectively, investors have rewarded BP for its operating performance and left Exxon to languish as it tries to play catch-up. There's no question that BP is doing well right now, and investors who are seeking a high-yield oil play should probably take a close look. But when you take valuation into consideration, Exxon starts to look a lot more interesting. Add in Exxon's rock-solid balance sheet, dividend history, and what appears to be a turn higher on the production front, and it looks like a better overall option than BP at this point.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


This is the time of year to look for big-ticket items on sale... for under the tree or for your portfolio! And with Brent Crude prices sliding below $60 a barrel for the first time all year, there are dozens of oil stocks trading at a discount to their summer highs. 
We asked three Motley Fool contributors which oil stocks look like good buys right now, and they came back with Anadarko Petroleum (NYSE:APC), ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), and Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.A)(NYSE:RDS.B). Here's why they think these stocks are great selections for the long term. 
ALTHOUGH THE STOCK MARKET HASN'T BEEN KIND TO THE OIL INDUSTRY OVER THE PAST FEW MONTHS, TOP OIL COMPANIES ARE STILL WORTH CONSIDERING. IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Matt DiLallo (Anadarko Petroleum): After rising steadily for nearly two years and hitting a high of more than $70 a barrel in early October, crude prices have tumbled over the past month, crashing back toward $50. That wipeout highlights why investors should focus on owning oil stocks that can thrive in both good times and bad.
One oil stock built to weather the current market conditions is Anadarko Petroleum. That's evident in the company's recently released plans for 2019. The oil giant expects to invest $4.3 billion to $4.7 billion on expansion projects next year, which should grow its oil production 10% compared with 2018's average. More importantly, Anadarko Petroleum can finance that budget on the cash flows produced at $50 oil, which is below the current oil price. Meanwhile, the company noted that it would generate significant free cash flow if oil prices rise, with it able to produce $1.6 billion in free cash at $60 oil.
Anadarko plans to use that money, as well as the nearly $4 billion it has in the bank after selling its midstream assets, on three things. First, it added another $1 billion to its share repurchase program, bringing it up to $5 billion. The company has already spent $3.5 billion in the past year to retire 10% of its shares, leaving it with $1.5 billion remaining on that plan, which it expects to complete by the middle of 2020. The oil giant also plans to retire another $500 million in debt next year, bringing its repayment total to $2 billion. Finally, it boosted its dividend another 20% and has now increased its payout by a jaw-dropping 500% in the past year.
With shares of Anadarko's stock plunging more than 30% from its recent high, now is a great time to buy the oil giant, since it can thrive no matter what happens to oil prices in 2019.
Travis Hoium (ExxonMobil): The oil market can be one of the most volatile commodity markets in the world, swinging wildly on oil prices and investment decisions companies large and small are making to adapt to the market. That puts a lot of stress on companies and investors alike. One company with a business diverse enough to adapt to any changes in the market is ExxonMobil, and that's why it's my favorite oil stock today. The energy giant does everything from drilling for oil to refining oil to putting it into people's vehicles. 
What I want to focus on today is the cash that's generated by this oil business. You can see in the chart below that ExxonMobil generated $16.8 billion in free cash flow over the past year and $23.2 billion of net income. Both metrics can swing depending on where oil prices are at any given time, but long term this is billions of cash flow generated by the business. 

XOM NET INCOME (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS.
Importantly, this cash flow funds the 4.2% dividend yield investors currently get from the stock. Long term I think we'll see cash flow growth as oil consumption increases globally and disruptive replacements take longer than expected to gain traction. ExxonMobil isn't investing in new technologies that may never pay dividends, it's all about oil, natural gas, and generating cash flow -- and for investors looking into the oil industry, that's a good position to be in. 
John Bromels (Royal Dutch Shell): Let's start with the good news. Although slumping oil prices have shaved some money off of oil companies' stock prices, those share price declines have translated into higher dividend yields for oil companies. Best-in-class dividend payer Royal Dutch Shell is now sporting a 6.2% yield, higher than it's been all year! But that's not the only reason to invest in this big oil company.
One reason is that Shell embarked on a cost-cutting spree during the big global oil price slump of 2014-2017, and managed to push its average break-even price down below $50 a barrel. That means that even with today's lower oil prices, Shell will still be able to turn a profit. Better yet, many of Shell's assets have break-even prices of less than $40 a barrel. One recent Shell deepwater project began production in May with a break-even price of less than $30 a barrel. 
But even if oil prices continue to drop, Shell has its bases covered. For one thing, as a Big Oil major, it derives a significant portion of its income from its refining and marketing operations, which aren't as tied to the price of oil as its production operations. Also, Shell has been aggressively buying back shares, and expects to repurchase $25 billion worth of its own stock by 2020, which will make existing shares more valuable. And if oil prices drop hard and never recover? The company is making substantial investments in the liquefied natural gas (LNG) sector, in which CEO Ben van Beurden projects demand outstripping supply in the early 2020s. 
All told, if there's an oil company built to withstand a drop in the price of oil, it's gotta be Shell.



Before you consider Royal Dutch Shell plc, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Royal Dutch Shell plc wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


