Last year, the United States became a net exporter of natural gas for the first time since 1957. Although 77% of exports traveled through pipelines, that's down from 98% in 2012. The rest came from liquefied natural gas (LNG) shipped on specialized ocean tankers. The nation exited 2017 with three LNG export terminals boasting a combined capacity of 3 billion cubic feet per day (Bcf/d). That's a pretty big number, but it will seem laughably small in a decade or so.   
If investors add up all LNG export facilities that have been approved by (12, including three that are operating) and proposed to (14) American energy regulators, then they arrive at a combined LNG export capacity of 44.2 Bcf/d. Some may never get built. Those that do may not enter service for another decade or more. Either way, it shows the incredible potential of the fledgling American LNG industry.  
I understand that 44.2 Bcf/d is almost so large it doesn't make sense, but investors looking to gain a foothold in the up-and-coming industry shouldn't feel overwhelmed. Here are five LNG export projects energy investors should know about.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Cheniere Energy (NYSEMKT:LNG) was the first company to make a bold bet on the potential for the United States to export large volumes of excess natural gas. It was risky, but it's paid off in spades. The business posted $3.8 billion in revenue and over $1 billion in operating income in the first half of 2018 -- and that's all from a single -- albeit massive -- facility.
In 2016, Sabine Pass became the first new major LNG export terminal in the country. It wields a capacity of 2.8 Bcf/d, although approved expansion projects will add 1.4 Bcf/d. No other approved or proposed facility matches that combined volume, but the list of projects expected to come on line by the end of 2019 includes a few other monsters dotting the Gulf Coast. That includes Corpus Christi, the second facility of Cheniere Energy. 
LNG Export Terminal
Majority Owner
Start-Up Date
Approved Annual Capacity
Sabine Pass
Cheniere Energy
2016
2.8 Bcf/d (operating)
1.4 Bcf/d (under construction)
Cameron
Sempra Energy (NYSE:SRE)
2019
2.1 Bcf/d
1.4 Bcf/d (approved, not under construction)
Corpus Christi
Cheniere Energy
2019
2.14 Bcf/d
Freeport
Freeport LNG
September 2019
2.14 Bcf/d
Golden Pass
ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM)
Finalizing investment decision
2.1 Bcf/d
DATA SOURCES: EIA, FERC, AND COMPANY RESOURCES.
While there are also LNG export terminals currently or soon-to-be operating at Elba Island (Kinder Morgan, Southern Company), Cove Point (Dominion Energy), and Kenai (ConocoPhillips), they have a combined export capacity of 1.3 Bcf/d. They're just not going to be big needle-movers for their owners, individual investors included.
That's not the case for the five projects in the table above. For instance, Sempra Energy owns a 50.2% stake in the Cameron LNG project, which is expected to bring three production units (called "trains" in industry lingo) on line in 2019. The first two were originally expected to come on line by now, but were delayed. It won't matter much once they're all ramped up: Cameron LNG is expected to export $8.6 billion of LNG each year, plus another $2.2 billion in natural gas liquids and crude oil. And that doesn't include two more production units already approved by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC). 
Not wanting to get complacent with its early lead, Cheniere Energy is expanding the existing Sabine Pass from the four production units already in service. A fifth train is expected to start commerical operations in the second quarter of 2019. Construction has yet to begin for the sixth train, although it has received regulatory approval. Meanwhile, the first two trains at Corpus Christi are expected to start up in the first half of 2019, with a third about to begin construction.  

LNG TOTAL RETURN PRICE DATA BY YCHARTS.
Those will be quickly followed by Freeport LNG with the export terminal of the same name. While the company is privately held right now, the customer base for the project shows electric utilities, industrial companies, and Asian countries, in general, are all eager to get their hands on the cheap energy source. For instance, the project will ship supercooled gas to electric utility Tokyo Electric Power Company (desperate to replace its nuclear generation fleet), oil major BP, conglomerate Toshiba Corp, and an electric and gas utility in South Korea.  
Last but not least is the Golden Pass export terminal proposed by ExxonMobil (majority owner), ConocoPhillips, and Qatar Petroleum. While no final investment decision has been made, the project may be able to come on line a little quicker than most. That's because it's converting an existing import terminal to send gas in the other direction (similar to Cheniere Energy's Sabine Pass facility), which means it has a good chunk of existing pipeline and port infrastructure already in place. Another potential catalyst: it's located in Sabine Pass, Texas, which is home to a lot of LNG process know-how and infrastructure -- something that can't be discounted in the early goings of the industry. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
While the five LNG export terminals discussed above will get the party started for America's soon-to-be dominance in global energy markets, there are a handful more projects coming down the pipeline. Some of those will test out newer technology, such as smaller or faster liquefaction trains, that project sponsors say will provide industry-leading economics. Some will sport new business models, partly in response to shifting market dynamics that the pioneers avoided by locking in long-term contracts. The main takeaway is simple: Energy investors should get familiar with the LNG industry because it's here to stay.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Chasing yield can be a dangerous pursuit for income-loving investors, as some of the most dangerous dividend-paying stocks sport very high yields. Better to look for stocks that can also enjoy a bit of capital appreciation with businesses solid enough to support the dividend, and perhaps even grow it over time.
ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), General Motors (NYSE:GM), and GEO Group (NYSE:GEO) have been identified by three Motley Fool contributors as meeting those criteria. Read on to see why you may want to buy one, two, or all three of them for your own portfolio.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Dan Caplinger (ExxonMobil): When it comes to top stocks, it's pretty rare to see high-yielding dividend payers among the largest companies in the world. Yet oil giant ExxonMobil has achieved this status, with a dividend yield of 4.1%, and given its market capitalization of nearly $340 billion, ExxonMobil pays more cash in total dividends than all but a small handful of companies globally.
A big reason why ExxonMobil's dividend yield has risen has to do with its risk profile and how investors perceive the company. Even though crude oil prices have rebounded sharply from their lowest levels of a few years ago, the oil giant is large enough that it won't see as clear an improvement from rising crude as will smaller players in the industry. Rival Chevron has shown faster growth lately, with profit growth in its most recent quarter of more than 50% compared to just an 18% gain for ExxonMobil.
What ExxonMobil is counting on is its long-term projects paying off. That requires patience from shareholders, but over time, longtime investors know how rewarding the stock has been. In the meantime, collecting lucrative dividends is a great way to wait for the big returns that ExxonMobil has achieved historically.
Daniel Miller (General Motors): Most of the perception surrounding General Motors -- and the rest of the automotive industry -- is dire considering we're reaching peak auto sales in the U.S. market for this cycle. However, beyond that, General Motors offers investors a robust 4.26% dividend yield and a two-part story: a valuable core business and the future of mobility.
Looking more closely at GM's valuable core, it's pulling back on less profitable markets internationally and doubling down on its more profitable full-size trucks and its luxury Cadillac brand. One great thing for GM investors is that its truck business is a little different than the rest of the automotive industry. The truck segment offers stronger consumer loyalty, competitive moats, and strong new and used average transaction prices -- which is why Detroit automakers have dominated the segment for decades. GM believes its next-generation Silverado and Sierra architecture will be more profitable and can deliver significant growth on the top and bottom lines.
Another factor that has become increasingly important for global automakers is having a successful luxury lineup, because those sales are much higher margin compared to mainstream vehicle segments. Cadillac has boomed in China, and GM hopes to revive growth here in the U.S. by increasing its segment coverage. In fact, GM expects to have more than 90% market coverage by 2020 compared to 65% during the first quarter, thanks to releasing one new Cadillac every six months on average through 2021.
Doubling down on trucks and Cadillacs will help support GM's business as sales peak in the U.S., but for long-term investors, GM has turned itself into a potential leader in driverless vehicles. To sum up GM Cruise, the automaker's autonomous vehicle unit, its business scope will focus on the following: autonomous vehicle ride sharing, monetizing the driverless in-car experience, big data from its network of ride-sharing vehicles, and transportation of goods in its ride-share network. SoftBank, known for its technology investments, agreed to invest $2.25 billion in GM Cruise, valuing the unit at $11.5 billion, and one analyst has gone as far as to say it could be worth up to $43 billion. 
Those factors, along with GM's robust 4.26% dividend yield, make the automaker a top dividend stock with long-term upside for investors that can stomach slowing U.S. sales in the near term. 
Rich Duprey (GEO Group): With President Trump continuing his crackdown on illegal immigrants entering the country, private prison operators like GEO Group stand to benefit, and investors can reap the windfall.
Although controversial in some circles, the growing need for detention facilities to house those awaiting prosecution is acute. There were reportedly 50,000 people apprehended along the Mexican border in May alone, a 160% year-over-year increase.
Industry leader CoreCivic has operated detention facilities for the federal government for more than 30 years, and it should see an increase in the number of contracts it wins, but Geo Group has long been a participant in the market, and it operates processing and detention centers along the southern border.
Shares of both contractors have been rising since April, when Trump's enhanced policies went into effect, with CoreCivic rising 32% compared to GEO Group's 24% increase. Yet the former is a much more expensive stock. Both go for around 18 times trailing earnings and 17 times next year's estimates, but CoreCivic's stock trades at 52 times the free cash flow it produces compared to almost 20 times by GEO Group. That's not bargain material, but GEO Group is a sturdy real estate investment trust that saw revenues rise 4% last year to $2.3 billion. Like all REITs, GEO Group also pays out almost all of its profits as dividends to investors, a payout that currently yields 7.8%.
Income-seeking investors who are not put off by controversial stocks could earn substantial cash rewards for sticking by GEO Group as the tougher immigration policies play out.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


