Hess has a large Bakken Shale position that will be a key growth driver for the company in the both the near and long term, helping to keep it moving forward until its Guyana projects start coming online in a couple of years. Those dual growth drivers make Hess a compelling oil growth stock for the long term. In this Industry Focus: Energy clip, host Nick Sciple and Fool.com contributor Matt DiLallo discuss:
A full transcript follows the video.




Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


This video was recorded on Oct. 25, 2018.
Nick Sciple: Let's talk about another player in the Bakken region. That's Hess Corporation, HES. Hess has some plays going on in the Bakken. They're also involved in Guyana. They partnered with Exxon to drill one of the largest offshore discoveries in recent memory. Do you want to talk about what's going on with Hess? What's going on in the Bakken with them? How does the Bakken fit into their overall strategy for the business?
Matt DiLallo: Hess has been an interesting name. They've really reshaped their portfolio the last couple of years. They sold off a lot of different things. They sold off their Utica shale stuff; they sold off a lot of international plays. But they've kept what they think are the best. In their case, it's the Bakken. Hess is one of the better drillers out there. They have a manufacturing process that they've taken toward it, where they're drilling wells focused on cutting costs and really manufacturing oil out there by drilling wells that they have a high probability of delivering certain production growth rates and certain returns. They're using things like the Bakken, Guyana, as the growth engine of the company. They think they can grow production of the Bakken at a 15%-20% compound annual growth rate through 2021. They have enough inventory to drill for about 15 years at $60 oil. Higher oil prices free up some more inventory. There's plenty of growth out there. They just added another rig earlier this year; they plan on adding another rig. Lots of growth out in the Bakken.
That will help them in the near term while they and ExxonMobil ramp up this Guyana find, which is truly amazing. It has loads and loads of low-cost oil out there. Hess sees that as being the next growth driver, probably 2020-2021 when that'll come online.
They think they can grow cash flow at a 25% compound annual rate for years to come. These two plays are so high-margin, will produce so much money. Hess, between these two, could be a really great long-term oil company, because they can do it at $60 a barrel. Really interesting long-term name.
Sciple: Let's talk a little bit more about, in Guyana, Hess' partnership with Exxon, that relationship there. Exxon is the operator there. How advantageous is that for Hess? That has to be a great resource to have, partnering with such a large oil player like Exxon.
DiLallo: Yeah, Exxon is one of the better companies in the business at drilling for returns. They've been phenomenal over the years at some of the interesting metrics, like returns on capital employed. Because they're so focused on returns, that's what benefits Hess here. Exxon will invest in this play because it's going to produce long-term returns and very good returns. Exxon sees this as being one of the key drivers, along with the Permian, of enabling it to double earnings by 2025. For a company the size of Exxon, that's a huge, huge growth potential. So, for Hess to be a partner on this, it's really a great deal for Hess. Exxon knows how to drill, knows how to produce oil. I like Hess specifically because it's locked in. But you add the two together, and it's a really nice company to follow.
Sciple: When you look at management's presentations, they talk about that Guyana and the Bakken are their growth drivers, but they have some other plays that are more of their cash flow drivers that they use to feed those growth engines. That's their assets in Malaysia and the Deepwater Gulf of Mexico. They're saying those plays are getting them 70% of the cash from operations through 2020, but only 20% of their capex. These are things that don't require a lot of capex to keep throwing off cash, but they can really use those other assets that they have to generate cash, to really invest in those big growth drivers, like you mentioned in Guyana and the Bakken.
DiLallo: Right. That's something that investors should look at when they're looking at oil companies. Some, like Continental, are just focused on shale plays. These pump in a lot of money upfront, and they produce really fast. Then there's longer-term things like offshore, oil sands, LNG. They take a lot of money upfront, and take years before they come online, but then they produce lots of cash and production for years to come. That's what Guyana will be. It's a large upfront investment, but in the future, it'll turn out to be like Malaysia, like the Gulf of Mexico, where it can produce cash flow for years to come with little long-term investment. That's another reason why I like Hess over a company such as Continental. It does have these cash flow drivers, so it'll make more steady income over the years. It just reduces the risk for, if oil prices were to collapse again, we'd see the Bakken shale probably not grow as fast, which would hurt Continental, but it probably wouldn't hurt Hess' long-term growth.
Sciple: We wanted to mention, for folks that are income investors, Hess also has a midstream entity that you can buy shares in. It has a 6% yield. It's been growing distribution at 15%. Strong financials, no debt. Do you want to talk about what opportunity that Hess Midstream vehicle might be for more income-focused investors?
DiLallo: If investors don't want to be exposed to oil prices, Hess Midstream is an interesting way to play the Bakken without having that exposure to oil prices. It basically builds gathering pipelines, which are the need to hook oil and gas wells to the country's midstream pipeline system. It helps Hess be able to get this production to customers. It's basically like a toll booth, and they just collect steady cash flow as volumes flow through. They're able to take that cash flow, reinvest some of it into building more pipelines, more processing facilities, that sort of thing, and then distributing it to shareholders. 6% in today's environment is pretty good, and it's a very safe 6%. They have no debt. They cover their dividend very well with cash flow. They have lots of growth ahead because they're helping Hess, with Hess growing its production over 15%. Those volumes will flow through the midstream pipelines, generating cash flow. They think they can grow that distribution by about 15% a year for the foreseeable future. Add in the potential to help third parties out, and I think it's a really interesting way to play the Bakken without getting all that exposure to oil.
International energy giant ExxonMobil Corporation (NYSE:XOM) hasn't been a particularly rewarding investment over the past year or so. In fact, the stock has basically treaded water for the past 12 months. Before you jump ship and buy an oil stock like Anadarko Petroleum Corporation (NYSE:APC), which is up about 30% over the same span, you need to step back and understand the implications of these companies' business models. Indeed, while Anadarko is killing it right now, Exxon is still the better long-term buy for more conservative investors.
Although Anadarko Petroleum owns a midstream business, it predominantly operates in the upstream sector as an oil and natural gas driller. Oil sales alone made up around 70% of revenue in the second quarter. It is a big player in the U.S. onshore market, though it has exposure to a number of foreign markets, including Mexico and Africa. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
There's no question that Anadarko has been firing on all cylinders lately. Revenue grew 30% between 2016 and 2017, with year-over-year revenue increases in the first and second quarters suggesting that another top-line advance in 2018 is highly likely. Moreover, after a string of red ink, the oil driller was in the black in the first half of the year. And it expects to grow its oil production by 13% this year.     
If you believe oil prices are going to head higher, or at least not fall into another deep downturn, then Anadarko is a pretty interesting stock. However, long-term debt makes up around 50% of the company's capital structure. Add in the debt of its controlled limited partnerships, which it breaks out separately on its balance sheet, and that number goes up to nearly 60%.   
That's a lot of debt for a company whose top line is highly dependent on a volatile commodity -- and one for which capital spending is a huge recurring cost, with the company planning to invest roughly $4 billion on the drilling side this year alone. In fact, through the first six months of the year, Anadarko has spent more cash on capital expenditures than it generated from its operations. If oil prices were to fall like they did in mid-2014, which wouldn't be an unusual event in the energy space, Anadarko could quickly find itself forced to pull back on its capital plans, with its bottom line likely falling back into the red. It could also end up cutting its dividend again, like it did in 2016 (a painful 80%).   
It's in that exact environment that a diversified and conservative company like Exxon shines. For example, Exxon managed to remain profitable throughout the last oil downturn, using its rock-solid balance sheet to support capital spending and steadily grow its dividend. In fact, with 36 years of annual dividend increases, it boasts a dividend record none of its peers can match. Anadarko didn't hold up nearly as well through that period, and its disparate stock price performance highlights the difference -- Exxon fell around 23%, while Anadarko lost more than two-thirds of its value.   

XOM DATA BY YCHARTS.
There are two big differences you need to focus on, here. First, Exxon's business is broadly diversified across the energy value chain. Upstream is its biggest business, but it also has sizable chemicals and refining operations. Downstream assets like these tend to benefit from falling oil prices, since oil is a key input. That won't offset all of the pain if oil declines steeply, but it will provide a meaningful counterbalance.
A real-life example might help. In 2015, when oil prices were still in a steep decline, Exxon's upstream business saw earnings fall about 75%. However, downstream earnings more than doubled. The end result was a roughly 50% decline in overall earnings. Not great, but much better than what would have happened if Exxon didn't have a diversified portfolio.   
Exxon's balance sheet, meanwhile, provides another safety valve. The company's debt load more than doubled during the oil downturn that started in mid-2014. That said, long-term debt peaked at around 15% of the capital structure. And it's down to around 10% today, as Exxon's conservative management team has been focused on debt reduction -- essentially preparing the balance sheet for the next oil downturn. There's little question that Exxon can keep spending on its future, and returning value to investors via dividends, if oil prices fall again.
So, why has Exxon been such a lackluster investment? The answer is that production has been weak, and returns on capital employed have fallen from leading the pack to just middle of the road. It's been tough to stay positive about the company, which simply hasn't been able to fully benefit from the current oil upturn, the same one that has helped Anadarko thrive. Exxon is aware of the problems it faces and has plans to right the ship, but it's taking a long-term, conservative approach (just like it always does), favoring profitable investments over quick, short-term fixes.
This is why long-term investors should be particularly interested in Exxon today. Its yield, at around 4%, is historically high, and its price to tangible book value is historically low. And, when oil prices decline again, it will be on financially solid ground to deal with the headwind without skipping a beat.
There are good reasons Anadarko's stock has outperformed Exxon's over the past year, and it will likely continue to do so while oil prices are strong. However, when you look at a highly cyclical industry like oil drilling, you should examine the full cycle and not just the most recent upturn. When you pull back and look at how well these two companies performed during the last downturn and how well their balance sheets are prepared for future oil price turbulence, Exxon looks like the more desirable investment. That's particularly true for income investors and those with a conservative bent.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


