The investment case for ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) has always been one that focuses on the very long term. Most of the time, that can come at the detriment of short-term results. That had certainly been the case so far in 2018, as the company produced lackluster results. This past quarter, though, some of the things ExxonMobil has been working on over the past several years started to materialize and led to a much better-than-expected earnings result.
Let's look at what the company did this past quarter to go from routinely disappointing earnings results to a pleasantly surprising quarter, and what it means for investors from here on out. 
DATA SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL EARNINGS RELEASE. EPS= EARNINGS PER SHARE.
After several consecutive quarters that probably left investors with headaches from smashing their heads on their keyboards, this past quarter's result was a breath of fresh air. Even though the company's production numbers won't wow anyone, Exxon grew production in the right places with higher output of oil and less North American natural gas, which has been a real drag on profitability. As a result, the company benefited immensely from higher price realizations on its oil production and turned its U.S. upstream earnings into a significant profit center instead of a drag on earnings. 
What was equally impressive was the company's downstream and chemical segments, which were able to capture value from oil price discrepancies both in the U.S. and Europe. The only reason its chemical earnings were down was because of major scheduled downtime at its Singapore chemical complex.
DATA SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL. CHART BY AUTHOR.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The overarching theme for this past quarter was the benefits of integration and the ability to squeeze more profit out of each barrel. On the quarterly conference call, Jack Williams, senior vice president of chemicals and downstream, highlighted how its logistics, refining, and chemical production is generating a lot of value from its production in the Permian Basin.
[T]oday, we have the ability to run 450,000 barrels a day of light crude in our Gulf Coast refining circuit, and this has provided ample incentive to secure efficient transportation capacity to our refineries well in excess of equity production from the Permian. Currently, we have about 270,000 barrels a day of committed capacity and that's likely going to grow further in the coming quarters. And the 450,000 barrels a day is growing, too. In addition to the Beaumont expansion, we're working on some other smaller de-bottleneck projects to add about another 50,000 barrels to ultimately take our Gulf Coast light crude processing capacity to over 750,000 barrels a day. And then in addition to our three Gulf Coast integrated facilities, we run Permian crude at 10 other sites outside the U.S., including our Singapore crude cracker.
[...] Year to date with the actual environment we're seeing, we've made well over $1.2 billion across this value chain. And it's clear from the current environment, highlighting the value of our approach in the Permian.
You can read a full transcript of ExxonMobil's conference call.

XOM DATA BY YCHARTS
One of the most frustrating things about Exxon's results over the past few quarters has been declining production. While other Big Oil companies were growing production at eye-popping rates, Exxon's was slowly dwindling from a combination of project timing, natural field decline, and a deliberate winding down of U.S. natural gas production. 
This past quarter, though, the company proved that it doesn't have to grow production at a high rate to generate loads of cash. The focus on getting the most value out of every barrel produced through logistics, refining, and processing is very much a reflection of the mindset of CEO Darren Woods, who spent decades on the downstream side of the business. 
It's still going to take a long time for some of ExxonMobil's largest and most profitable projects -- Guyana, Mozambique LNG, and Brazil -- to start operations, so investors today should still have their eyes on 2021-2025 as these production sources go live. In the meantime, the company has a way to generate ample profits that will make its quarterly results much less frustrating than the past few.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Oil is a volatile commodity, prone to swift and material price swings. This is a fact of life for every company that operates in the oil patch. The best that a company like ExxonMobil Corporation (NYSE:XOM) can do is prepare for the worst. In fact, this integrated oil giant's conservative approach is one of the key reasons it is an attractive way to invest in the energy industry. Here's a big, $20 billion reason to buy Exxon.
In 2012, ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP) went all in on oil and natural gas production, jettisoning its refining assets in a spinoff of Phillips 66. The refining business tends to benefit from falling oil prices because oil is a key input. At that point, long-term debt made up around 30% of ConocoPhillips' capital structure. When oil prices started to crater in mid-2014, the company (which was now focused on drilling) saw its revenue plummet, and it started to bleed red ink. It pulled back on spending and added debt to support its remaining capital spending plans and dividend. In the end, however, it was forced to trim its dividend by 66% in 2016. Long-term debt peaked at $26.2 billion in 2016 (roughly 43% of the capital structure).   
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
A lack of diversification that left ConocoPhillips entirely reliant on oil and natural gas was the big driver of the company's dividend cut. But even companies that remain diversified, like Royal Dutch Shell PLC (NYSE:RDS.B), can have trouble dealing with volatile oil prices. Shell, with upstream and downstream operations, has chosen to make heavy use of long-term debt, a move that limits the flexibility it has to add additional debt to its balance sheet.
At the end of 2014, Shell had $38 billion in long-term debt, roughly 18% of its capital structure. As it worked through the downturn, which included making a large opportunistic acquisition, long-term debt ballooned to $83 billion by the end of 2017, or roughly 30% of the capital structure. To be fair, Shell tends to keep a great deal of cash around to help soften the blow of oil downturns, and it quickly announced plans to sell assets to pay down debt. But that didn't stop the international oil giant from putting dividend increases on hold, keeping the dividend static since the first quarter of 2014. During the worst of the downturn, investors were worried that the dividend would end up being cut. 
That, by the way, is exactly what Italian energy giant Eni S.p.A (NYSE:E) did in 2015, trimming its payout by roughly 29%. Part of the issue was that long-term debt was roughly 24% of the capital structure heading into the oil downturn. That number peaked in the 40% range in 2016, as the oil major, like most peers, used leverage to support its business while oil prices and financial results were weak.   
The two themes above are diversification and debt. Too little of the first and/or too much of the second, and oil downturns are very worrisome affairs. To be fair, none of the above companies were at risk of going bankrupt because of falling oil prices. But it clearly affected their businesses and has resulted in investors getting hit with dividend cuts or long periods of static payments (the latter is clearly more preferable, but often precedes a dividend cut and leaves investors understandably on edge). Which is exactly why investors should take a long look at Exxon's rock-solid balance sheet.
Heading into the oil downturn, Exxon's diversified business was carrying roughly $6.5 billion worth of debt. That was a tiny 4% of the capital structure. By the end of 2016, debt had ballooned to $27.7 billion, a massive increase but still only about 15% of the capital structure. That's less leverage than Shell, Eni, and ConocoPhillips had as they entered the downturn. Like its peers, Exxon used the debt to fund capital expenditures and support its dividend. That dividend, meanwhile, was increased each year through the downturn, despite the hit to revenue and earnings from low oil prices. The company's annual dividend-increase streak is up to an incredible 36 consecutive years.   

XOM dividend per share (annual) data by YCharts.
Despite the relatively lower use of debt, Exxon has been using the current oil rebound to reduce leverage. Long-term debt is down to around $20.7 billion, or roughly 10% of the capital structure. Put another way, it still has a huge amount of financial flexibility to add debt to its balance sheet to deal with commodity volatility while continuing to reward investors with annual dividend increases.   
You can argue that Chevron Corporation (NYSE:CVX) is similarly conservative, noting the oil giant's impressive record of annual dividend hikes (31 years and counting). Only the dividend was held at $1.07 a share for 10 consecutive quarters during the oil downturn -- that's two and a half years, and a long time for investors to worry about a potential dividend cut. The annual streak is only alive because of timing, since Chevron increases its dividend in the middle of the year. Debt was about 10% of the capital structure heading into 2014 and peaked at nearly 20% in 2016. The big difference is that Chevron's business, while diversified, is more heavily weighted toward the upstream side. Debt is down to around 16% of the capital structure at this point, but dividend investors should still think about the bigger picture before jumping aboard here.   
Oil and natural gas are highly cyclical commodities, which energy companies like Exxon, Shell, Eni, Chevron, and ConocoPhillips can't do anything about. What they can do is prepare for the ups and downs they know will arrive. The last downturn was a trying affair that highlighted the benefit of taking a conservative approach to the energy space.
Exxon stood out on this front and still does. While the $20 billion in long-term debt it has on the balance sheet today is high compared with its pre-downturn levels, it remains modest versus its peers. And it suggests that Exxon will be able to keep paying its dividend and investing in its business when the next downturn arrives. It has ensured that it has ample room for additional leverage on its balance sheet to handle the cyclical ups and downs of the oil industry.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


