When the market goes into a tailspin like the one that we've been in, it's generally a great time to load up on high-quality stocks that are household names.
However, that's not necessarily always the case. Sometimes crises can shine a spotlight on weaknesses investors may have been overlooking when times were good. As Warren Buffett once said, "Only when the tide goes out do you discover who's been swimming naked." 
At the same time, while coronavirus has punished some well-known names, it has also spurred investors to chase stocks they think will benefit from the stay-at-home economy.  The truth is, some household names have deserved their punishment, while newly crowned "winners" of the coronavirus crisis might have a rude awakening down the line if results don't live up to the hype.
In any case, just because a stock is a housheold name doesn't necessarily mean it's a great investment all the time, and the following three stocks might not live up to their reputations.   
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Even though shares of ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) have been cut in half since the year began, investors may want to think twice about rushing out to buy shares. Exxon has long been thought of as the biggest and safest oil major out there, with global operations in upstream drilling, both offshore and onshore in U.S. shale, along with downstream operations in refining and chemicals.
While Exxon may be safer than some other independent drillers now flirting with bankruptcy, it doesn't necessarily mean all is well with Exxon. Even before the coronavirus crisis hit, Exxon wasn't exactly doing well, with net income down some 30% in 2019 versus the prior year, as oil prices stagnated and refining and chemicals earnings plunged.
In fact, when you take a look at Exxon's five-year results, things don't look particularly enticing.
ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM)
2019
2018
2017
2016
2015
Earnings per share
$3.36
$4.88
$4.63
$1.88
$3.85
Net debt to capital
18.1
14.9
16.8
18.4
16.5
DATA SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL ANNUAL REPORT. CHART BY AUTHOR.

Exxon's current dividend payout is $3.48 per share, higher than last year's EPS and barely below the average $3.72 Exxon averaged over the past five years. Still, that average was before the recent implosion of oil prices and the breakout of a brutal Saudi Arabia-Russia oil price war, prompting the rating agencies to lower Exxon's credit rating from AA+ to AA.
Though Exxon only trades about 11 times last year's earnings and just under 10 times its average earnings over the past five years, and therefore seems incredibly cheap, remember that those are not crazy valuations for a company that is stagnant or declining, and one that may need to potentially cut its payout in the future to fund capex. Exxon has been a Dividend Aristocrat, having raised its payout every year for 37 years, but if it breaks that streak this year, the stock could lose more of its luster. And with the electric vehicle wave having the potential to seriously cut into oil demand looking out 10 to 20 years, Exxon may not be as bulletproof as some think.
As you can see in the disclosures below, I still own shares of Netflix (NASDAQ:NFLX), but I've reduced my stake recently. It isn't because Netflix isn't a great business run by great managers. Rather, it's a combination of the fact that the stock has done so well amid the crisis, bringing its valuation up to a level that may prove difficult from here.
