Once the largest company in the world, ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) has come under pressure, with falling oil prices and languishing production volumes. But patient investors can take some solace in knowing that while Exxon has ambitious plans to bolster production in the coming years, it will pay you a solid dividend yielding 4.1% annually at current prices while you wait.
But Exxon isn't the only high-yield dividend stock our market has to offer. To that end, we asked three top Motley Fool investors to each find a dividend stock that pays even more than Exxon does. Read on to learn why they like Retail Opportunity Investments (NASDAQ:ROIC), Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.A) (NYSE:RDS.B), and Seagate (NASDAQ:STX).
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
Steve Symington (Retail Opportunity Investments): This isn't the first time I've pitched Retail Opportunity Investments as a more generous dividend payer than the aforementioned oil titan. But the last time I did so in October 2018, I was hoping the shopping-center REIT, with its 4.4% annual yield at the time, was nearing the end of an extended hiatus in property acquisitions given difficult market conditions.
Alas, those tough conditions persisted through the end of 2018. But Retail Opportunity investments has stayed busy in the meantime by disposing of non-core properties and improving its balance sheet, even as it ended 2018 with a company-record 97.7% portfolio lease rate. What's more, during the fourth-quarter conference call two weeks ago, CEO Stuart Tanz added that "the uncertainty in the acquisition market is subsiding such that we could see off-market opportunities become more favorable as we move through the year." As such, Tanz says the company could be poised to make $50 million or more in new shopping-center acquisitions this year, resuming its longer-term trend of steady top- and bottom-line growth.
With Retail Opportunity Investments' dividend now yielding 4.6%, I think patient investors who buy now will be more than happy with their decision when it acquisitions resume in earnest.
Check out the latest earnings call transcripts for the companies we cover.
Reuben Gregg Brewer (Royal Dutch Shell): It's not that hard to find a yield that's higher than Exxon's 4.1%. What's hard is finding a higher yield that's worth buying. One that stands out in the energy space is Royal Dutch Shell. Like Exxon, it's a global integrated oil and gas company. Also like Exxon, it's been shifting toward natural gas in recent years, viewing natural gas as a key transition fuel as the world migrates to cleaner energy sources. But Shell sports a 7.4% yield.
There's one notable drawback with Shell. It has historically relied more heavily on debt, which can limit flexibility during difficult periods -- which aren't exactly uncommon in the volatile oil and gas industry. For example, long-term debt makes up around 20% of Shell's capital structure, versus less than half of that for Exxon. Offsetting this, Shell tends to carry much more cash on its balance sheet. It has roughly $20 billion of cash, versus Exxon's $6 billion. Still, a high debt level is a primary reason Shell's dividend hasn't increased since 2014.
While limited dividend growth is a clear negative, Shell stands out from Exxon in one very important way. It has taken a more aggressive approach toward adjusting its carbon footprint, including buying electric auto recharging stations and investing in electric generation assets. The goal is to keep scaling the electric side until it's on an equal footing with the company's oil and refining operations. If that sounds like a desirable direction to you, then Shell's big yield will probably be far more enticing than Exxon's. Dividend growth, meanwhile, is likely to resume, assuming Shell's shifting business mix pans out as expected.
Leo Sun (Seagate Technology): Seagate, the world's second largest hard disk drive (HDD) maker, trades at nine times forward earnings and pays a forward dividend yield of 5.5%. The stock trades at such a low multiple because investors are worried that flash-based solid state drives (SSDs) will gradually cannibalize sales of HDDs, slower enterprise spending will throttle its sales of HDDs to cloud customers, and sluggish sales of PCs will exacerbate the pain.
Those are all valid points, but sales of HDDs won't simply disappear. The lower prices of HDDs still make them preferable to pricier SSDs in the data-center market, and Seagate is selling more high-capacity drives (i.e., over 1 terabyte) to reduce its dependence on the consumer PC market.
Seagate is insulated from the current downturn in memory prices, because it generates less than 10% of its revenue from flash-based devices. Its main rival, Western Digital (NASDAQ:WDC), generates about half of its revenue from flash-based devices.
Analysts expect Seagate's revenue and earnings to fall 8% and 16%, respectively, this year. Those growth rates look dismal, but they're much better than WD's projected revenue and earnings declines of 19% and 63%, respectively, for the current year.
Seagate's growth is expected to stabilize next year. The stock probably won't rally anytime soon, but its low valuation and high yield should limit its downside potential. Seagate hasn't raised its dividend since 2015, but it spent just 42% of its free cash flow on its dividend over the past 12 months -- which gives it ample room for future increases.



Before you consider Royal Dutch Shell plc, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Royal Dutch Shell plc wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) shareholders have good reason to be frustrated. Among the five largest oil and gas companies in the world, referred to as supermajors, it's the only one that has lagged the total return (stock performance plus dividends) of the S&P 500 in the last three years. In fact, the stock's total return of 8% is far behind the 55% rise of the index in that span.
The performance is all the more surprising considering North American refining margins have been healthy for much of the past three years. But management believes the business will thrive thanks to its strength downstream. When coupled with a steady ramp-up of upstream projects in the coveted Permian Basin, it could help pull the business out of the doldrums. Does that makes ExxonMobil a buy?
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
While most peers have already begun to realize significant contributions from recent growth projects, it's taken ExxonMobil a little longer to get warmed up following the oil price crash of late 2014. Upstream production growth was difficult to come by for the business in 2018, but it exploited healthy refining margins in its downstream refinery network. The downstream segment saw fourth-quarter 2018 earnings rise to $2.7 billion, up from just $952 million in the year-ago period.
Healthy downstream operations should continue for the foreseeable future due to a confluence of factors, including cost-advantaged North American crude inputs, a new low-sulfur fuel requirement for shipping vessels going into effect on the first day of 2020, and various investments in infrastructure to adapt to expected demand surges in specific petroleum products, such as synthetic lubricants.
ExxonMobil will be well-prepared for growing demand for low-sulfur marine fuels after upgrading its complexes in Beaumont, Texas, and Rotterdam, Netherlands, by the end of 2019. Meanwhile, the business is well-positioned to leverage its salivating upstream assets in the Permian Basin. The acreage position underpins plans to triple upstream segment earnings between 2017 and 2025. 
The company boasts 1.6 million acres in the Permian Basin, with an estimated net recovery potential of 9.5 billion barrels of oil equivalent. Two-thirds of that production potential is packed into the Delaware Basin formation, which is currently home to less than half of its active rigs in the Permian Basin. Successful development would allow the supermajor to take advantage of its extensive refinery infrastructure along the American Gulf Coast, which could result in supercharged growth potential by the mid-2020s.
Check out the latest earnings call transcript for Exxon.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
ExxonMobil reported solid full-year 2018 operating results. The business delivered operating cash flow of $36 billion, its highest total since 2014 (oil prices collapsed later that year), although it's only half of what management thinks could be possible by 2025. It saw full-year 2018 earnings rise 6% compared to the year-ago period to a healthy $20.6 billion. Capital expenditures rose 12% year-over-year, which could become the new normal as the business ramps growth investments.
Despite finally seeing contributions from growth projects of years past, ExxonMobil shares don't look too attractive on several key valuation metrics -- including forward earnings, PEG ratio, and enterprise value (EV) to EBITDA -- compared to supermajor peers.    
Company
Forward PE
PEG Ratio
EV to EBITDA
Dividend Yield
ExxonMobil
14.4
1.20
7.5
4.2%
Royal Dutch Shell
10.0
1.71
5.8
5.9%
Total
9.1
21.1
5.5
5.2%
Chevron
14.9
0.43
7.7
4%
BP
10.3
0.40
5.8
5.8%
SOURCE: YAHOO! FINANCE.
As the table above demonstrates, ExxonMobil might be the least attractive supermajor based on the selected valuation metrics. It's expensive relative to future earnings expectations and EV. Its dividend, while above average compared to the broader stock market, fails to impress when ranked against peers. Simply put, investors looking to play growth in the Permian Basin, or own an oil supermajor, could do better.
Investors looking for ExxonMobil stock to catch up to peers in the near future may be disappointed. The business expects to plow at least $30 billion per year into new projects and growth initiatives, which will likely weigh on its cash flow for the foreseeable future. Meanwhile, the company's valuable acreage in the Permian Basin might still be a few years away from delivering closer to its full promise, especially considering persistent infrastructure constraints.
That said, if the business can deliver on its strategy in the next five years and successfully ramp up growth projects, then patient investors should be rewarded by the mid-2020s. But the bottom line is that there are simply better investments in the market right now than ExxonMobil.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


