The Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI) is America's most-watched index, and it's given us a lot of insight into the changing American economy over the years. You probably know more about the Dow than you think, simply because it's so closely followed by the financial news media. However, there are many fascinating facts about the Dow that lurk just beneath this day-to-day noise. We learned a few interesting bits of information about the Dow and its 30 representative companies yesterday, and today we're going to dig a little deeper into the details to find out more about the blue-chip index and what it says about the American economy today.
1. The Dow's 30 components together are worth nearly $5 trillion
From the largest market cap (ExxonMobil's (NYSE:XOM) $435 billion) to the smallest (Travelers' (NYSE: TRV) $32 billion), the 30 companies that make up the Dow are worth a combined $4.82 trillion today. To put that in perspective, that much money could pay for:
SOURCE: U.S. NAVY ARTIST VIA WIKIPEDIA.
2. The 30 Dow components make a lot of revenue
Multibillion-dollar market caps almost always mean multibillion-dollar revenue streams, and the Dow's 30 components certainly meet that criteria. The lowest annual revenue reported by any Dow company for the most recent fiscal year was Visa's (NYSE:V) $11.8 billion, which is still larger than the gross domestic products s of 66 countries or territories! The combined annual revenue of all 30 Dow companies is $2.83 trillion as of their most recent budget years, which would earn the Dow fifth place in global GDP if it were an independent country with 30 separate provinces. That's larger than France, Brazil, Italy, Spain, and Mexico combined!
 3. The Dow's components earn a lot of profit, too
Every Dow component is profitable, and their combined net income for the latest fiscal year added up to $325 billion. That's enough to buy all but two Dow companies -- ExxonMobil and Microsoft (NASDAQ: MSFT), which is currently worth several billion dollars more -- outright! Many Dow components also boast huge foreign cash hoards, but this profit stream would still only be enough to account for one-sixth of the $1.95 trillion American companies have now stashed abroad.
4. The Dow's components employ over 6 million people
Only one of the Dow's 30 companies -- Visa again, with a mere 9,500 reported employees -- has fewer than 30,000 people on its payroll, and many employ 75,000 or more. Retail behemoth Wal-Mart (NYSE:WMT) contributes the lion's share of the Dow's employees, as it reported a workforce of 2.2 million in its latest fiscal year. All told, there are 6,523,793 people working for the Dow's 30 components. That's enough people to make the Dow the 17th most-populous state in the U.S., ahead of Tennessee, Minnesota, Colorado, or Kansas.
SOURCE: JAMES CRIDLAND VIA FLICKR.
5. For Dow components, it pays to pump oil, but not to serve customers
The 30 Dow companies' reported revenue and earnings, and their reported employee numbers, give us an easy window into the relative profitability of each company. Of these 30 companies, two of the three most-profitable per employee are Big Oil representatives ExxonMobil and Chevron (NYSE: CVX), and the three least-profitable per employee are all retail outlets -- Wal-Mart earned only $7,575 in profit per employee in its latest fiscal year, but Home Depot (NYSE: HD) and McDonald's (NYSE: MCD) weren't far behind, as they were the only other Dow companies to earn less than $15,000 in profit per employee.
The Dow's most-profitable company, however, was all about moving money -- Visa cleared a whopping $526,316 in profit per employee last year.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


The Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI) accelerated their declines at midday Thursday, dropping 193 points as of 12:30 p.m. EDT. Among the factors sending the index downward today was the Bureau of Labor Statistics' report on the Consumer Price Index for April. Yet despite some sensational headlines that highlighted one particular aspect of the April report, investors with a long-term view shouldn't yet see inflation as a viable threat, and investors in inflation-sensitive stocks shouldn't panic.
SOURCE: GERALD R. FORD PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARY.
Putting inflation in context
One of the biggest worries that many policymakers have had over the past several years is that extremely accommodative monetary policy from the Federal Reserve and other global central banks would spur a wave of inflation. So far, those fears haven't become reality; in fact, many policymaking bodies have focused more on the deflationary threat than on the potential for higher prices down the road.
As a result, many news organizations touted the fact that today's data showed that the Consumer Price Index rose at the fastest rate in 10 months, and that sense of fear helped send the Dow Jones Industrials downward. Yet while that fact is true, the 0.3% rise in the overall CPI and the subdued rate of 0.2% for the core CPI only brought inflation levels up to where the Federal Reserve has hoped they would be.
Digging more deeply into the report, many of April's numbers reversed readings seen earlier in the year. For instance, after three straight months of substantial declines, gasoline prices rose 2.3% in April. On the other hand, electricity prices pulled back dramatically after rising in March, and soaring natural-gas prices moderated to just a 0.3% increase last month. Still, food prices have been remarkably resilient, rising 0.4% in each of the past three months. Within the food category, meat showed the strongest gains of almost 3% for the month, while costs of dairy products and fruits and vegetables also rose substantially.
Still, from a bigger-picture perspective, inflation remains in check, making today's Dow drop seem unjustified. The overall CPI has risen exactly 2% in the past year, matching the Fed's implicit inflation target. Even when you look at the various subindexes of the CPI, most remain squarely in the 2% to 3% range over the past 12 months.
SOURCE: FLICKR/LINDSEY G.
What investors should do
Certain stocks in the Dow Jones Industrials are more susceptible to inflation than others. For many companies, higher costs for raw materials reduce margins because companies aren't able to pass on costs to customers. Rising interest rates can hurt big financial stocks, particularly Travelers (NYSE:TRV) and other companies with large bond portfolios. On the other hand, ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), Chevron (NYSE:CVX), and other energy companies, can collect greater profits via inflation as the value of their production rises.
It makes sense to pay close attention to inflation levels to make sure that prices don't rise too fast. For now, though, there's little for consumers and investors to worry about inflation, and as long as current trends don't accelerate, policymakers should remain happy with what's happening regardless of today's drop in the Dow Jones Industrials.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


