This hasn't been a good year for investors in Big Oil. Shares of the two largest integrated oil majors -- ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and Chevron (NYSE:CVX) -- have plunged 15% to 20% each this year.

EXXONMOBIL AND CHEVRON STOCK PERFORMANCE, DATA BY YCHARTS.
Still, considering how far oil prices have fallen in the past year and a half, investors could be a lot worse off. The price of Brent crude oil has dropped 34% this year, even after plummeting 50% in the second half of 2014.

BRENT CRUDE OIL SPOT PRICE, DATA BY YCHARTS.
Unless oil prices bounce back more than expected in 2016, ExxonMobil and Chevron are likely to see another steep drop in their earnings power. That could endanger the dividends of these two dividend aristocrats, which could in turn lead to more sharp losses for investors.
Profits slump in 2015
Both ExxonMobil and Chevron have experienced huge earnings declines this year. At ExxonMobil, earnings sank 48% through the first nine months of the year, from $26.0 billion to $13.4 billion. Conditions were even worse at Chevron, where earnings plummeted 67% year over year during the same period, from $15.8 billion to $5.2 billion.
All of the pain has come from the upstream operations that produce crude oil and natural gas. Meanwhile, the combination of falling crude oil prices and rising product demand has led to higher earnings from refinery and chemical operations.
EXXONMOBIL IS BENEFITING FROM STRONGER CHEMICAL AND REFINERY PROFITS. IMAGE SOURCE: THE MOTLEY FOOL.
At ExxonMobil, upstream earnings slumped by nearly $16 billion in the first three quarters of 2015. However, the company's bottom line was cushioned by a $3 billion increase in downstream and chemical profits.
At Chevron, upstream earnings completely vanished in the first three quarters of the year, plummeting to a $600 million loss from a $14.2 billion profit a year earlier. Fortunately, downstream earnings more than doubled to $6.6 billion from $2.8 billion.
Earnings could take another dive
Right now, the outlook for 2016 is quite bleak. As bad as 2015 has been, the average price of Brent crude -- arguably the best gauge of global oil prices -- for the year will be a little more than $52 per barrel. Meanwhile, the Brent crude futures curve currently projects that prices will average about $40 per barrel in 2016.
The story is even worse in the natural gas market. A combination of rising production from "fracking" projects and weak heating demand because of unseasonably warm weather has driven prices down to levels not seen since 1999. Natural gas spot prices have plummeted 46% this year -- that's even more than crude oil -- with most of that drop coming since August.

HENRY HUB NATURAL GAS SPOT PRICE, DATA BY YCHARTS.
Meanwhile, it's less likely that ExxonMobil and Chevron will be bailed out by rising refinery profits next year. First, the comparisons will be much tougher after a strong 2015 for refining operations. Second, weak heating demand has sent prices for heating oil and other distillates plunging. This situation could offset the benefit of strong gasoline demand.
Indeed, refining crack spreads -- the difference between crude oil prices and product prices -- are already starting to narrow on a year-over-year basis in many (though not all) regions of the world.
Wall Street analysts don't seem to have fully incorporated this reality into their earnings projections yet. Analysts currently expect a modest 5% EPS decline at ExxonMobil next year, along with 4% EPS growth at Chevron. Unless oil and gas prices rebound, these estimates are way too high.
Dividend aristocrats no longer?
Even as profit has plummeted at both ExxonMobil and Chevron in 2015, the two companies increased their dividends. Indeed, they are both "dividend aristocrats," companies that have raised their dividends for at least 25 consecutive years.
The apparent stability of their dividends has helped prevent a greater rout in shares of ExxonMobil and Chevron. They already carry two of the highest yields among the dividend aristocrats. This placement helps to attract income-starved investors looking for high dividends.

CHEVRON IS ONE OF THE HIGHEST-YIELDING DIVIDEND ARISTOCRATS. IMAGE SOURCE: THE MOTLEY FOOL.
However, without a rebound in energy prices, these high dividends don't look sustainable. ExxonMobil generated $7.4 billion of free cash flow in the first nine months of the year but paid out $9.2 billion in dividends. During that same period, Chevron produced negative free cash flow (even including its more than $5 billion in asset sales). It then paid out more than $6 billion in dividends, forcing it to take on about $8 billion in debt.
ExxonMobil and Chevron are both moving fairly aggressively to reduce operating costs and cut capital spending for 2016 and beyond. However, this move isn't likely to overcome the cash flow pressure from even lower oil and gas prices, not to mention a potential slip in refinery earnings.
In short, if oil and gas prices remain on their current trajectory -- or go further south -- ExxonMobil and Chevron may find that their dividends are simply unaffordable. Chevron is in the most trouble, because it is already burning cash in 2015. This situation could force it to cut its dividend in the next year or so, sending its stock plunging much further.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


With the price of oil recently hitting a seven-year low and natural gas now at a 14-year low, there has been a deep impact on the cash flows at oil and gas companies. Many don't have enough money coming in to drill the required number of new wells needed to maintain their production rates, let alone any left over to pay shareholders a steady dividend. This has resulted in the reduction or suspension of a countless number of energy-related dividends. 
All that said, there are a few energy dividends that investors can still trust. Here are three companies that have been making their dividend a priority. 
Jason Hall
After Kinder Morgan's stunning announcement that it would cut its rock-solid (or so I thought) dividend by 75%, just days after announcing that it would generate plenty enough cash in 2016 to cover payouts, it's hard to put much trust in any energy company's ability to pay a steady divvy. 
But if there's one company with a dividend you can depend on, it's Phillips 66 (NYSE:PSX). 

PSX PAYOUT RATIO (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS.
As you can see above, Phillips 66's dividend only consumes 24% of profits. That leaves the company with a pile of money to invest back in the business (both for upkeep and expansion) and activities like share buybacks. 
The elephant in the corner is oil and natural gas prices, right? Not so fast.
Phillips 66 may not be completely immune from energy prices, but it's structurally much less affected than the majority of the industry. The company's refining segment benefits when domestic crude prices are down relative to Brent, and natural gas is a major feedstock for its chemicals business. In other words, cheap oil and natural gas mean lower input costs. That's good for the bottom line.
The risk is in its midstream segment, where commodity exposure has seen profits fall by 75%. But even with that hit, the company's earnings are down barely 1% for the year. When adjusted for gains from a business that was sold off last year, profits are actually up this year. 
Phillips 66's 2.5% dividend is more than just trustworthy. It's far more likely to be increased than get cut. 
Matt DiLallo
ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP) continues to make it clear to investors that its dividend remains trustworthy. In fact, CFO Jeff Sheets recently said:
Our top priority is the dividend. [A] compelling dividend is a core element of our value proposition and we think it is still appropriate. We're continuing to drive positive momentum in our underlying financial returns, a key focus area for us especially in this low-price environment.
The company stands so steadfastly behind its dividend because it firmly believes that having a strong dividend forces it to be more disciplined. Practically, this means that it won't chase growth for the sake of growth and that it will maintain a strong balance sheet during good times and bad so that it has the flexibility to continue the payout.  
Another reason that ConocoPhillips remains confident that its dividend isn't going anywhere but up is its ability to quickly adapt to the current downturn. The company recently set its 2016 capex budget, which is 25% less than it spent last year and 55% less than in 2014, and yet it still expects to grow its production 1% to 3% over last year. Furthermore, it has taken $2 billion out of its operational costs since 2014.
All that said, at the moment ConocoPhillips isn't yet generating enough cash flow to pay for its capex and its dividend, though that is by design. The company has been working toward a goal of being cash flow neutral by 2017 under a range of commodity prices, and it's sticking by that target date. In the meantime, it plans to use some of its debt capacity as well as sell non-core assets to bridge the gap. 
Unlike a lot of oil companies, ConocoPhillips' top priority is its dividend. Because of that, it entered the downturn in a position of strength, which means it can still comfortably maintain its dividend despite the persistent weakness in oil and gas prices. 

IMAGE SOURCE: CONOCOPHILLIPS.
Chuck Saletta
ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) is well positioned to protect its dividend, even with oil prices below $40 a barrel. There are at least three key reasons why.
Dividends are still not guaranteed payments, but given those three key reasons, ExxonMobil looks very well positioned to be able to protect its dividend, even with today's oil prices below $40 a barrel.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


