
SOURCE: SUNCOR ENERGY .
With oil prices down roughly 50% over the past year, some oil producers are simply trying to survive. Then there's a second group that's just trying to tread water by focusing on pushing costs down to balance cash flow with outflows for capex and dividends. Finally, a third group has emerged in what's really an elite class of oil companies that are thriving in the current environment because they're generating free cash flow while still managing to grow their production. Topping that list are Suncor Energy (NYSE:SU), Oasis Petroleum (NYSE:OAS), and ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM). Here are the secrets to their success.
The Canadian powerhouse
Through the first three quarters of this year, Suncor Energy has generated C$5.5 billion in cash flow. While Suncor plowed roughly C$2 billion of that amount back into maintenance and used another C$2.7 billion to fund growth projects, the company has still managed to generate C$875 million in free cash flow. In fact, it's generating so much free cash flow that it actually increased its dividend at a time when most oil producers are at best holding dividends flat. Further, Suncor Energy has even restarted its stock buyback program while also going on the offensive in making two notable acquisition overtures. Suffice it to say, Suncor Energy is thriving under the current conditions.
Its secret is simple. First, its integrated business model has really provided a lift to cash flow, with its refining and marketing segment kicking in 42% of its cash flow last quarter, which is up from 22% in the same quarter of last year. In addition, Suncor Energy has pushed its costs down to its lowest level in years, with its oil sands operating costs declining to levels not seen since 2007. When we add those factors to its growing production profile and strong balance sheet, and it puts Suncor in an elite category.
The Bakken gem
Oasis Petroleum, likewise, is generating free cash flow during the current environment even after investing to grow production, and it expects those trends to continue next year, even a $50 oil price. Its secret sauce is lower costs, thanks in part to its own vertical integration and its strong hedge portfolio:

SOURCE: OASIS PETROLEUM INVESTOR PRESENTATION.  
That hedge portfolio helps insulate some of Oasis' cash flow from weak oil prices, much as Suncor's refining assets do for its cash flow. However, it's when this strong cash flow shield is added to Oasis Petroleum's vertical integration that we see the real key to its success. Oasis has a midstream services segment and a well services segment, which work together to improve operational and financial performance by cutting out key middlemen. This advantage enabled Oasis to reduce its well costs and operating costs by 30% and 35%, respectively, year over year. So despite its smaller size, the compelling combination of production growth and free cash flow generation really puts Oasis in an elite class.
The big oil behemoth
So far this year, ExxonMobil has generated $26 billion in cash flow from operations and another $1.6 billion from asset sales. After investing more than $20 billion to both maintain and grow production, Exxon still generated $7.4 billion in free cash flow, which, like Suncor, it used to boost its dividend and buy back stock.
Exxon's success is also due to its integrated business model, with its downstream and chemicals segments driving strong cash flow. In fact, just last quarter its downstream earnings doubled year over year to $2 billion. Further, because of its scale, Exxon can really put pressure on its suppliers and service providers to reduce their costs, which has resulted in a 10% reduction in upstream costs compared with last year. Clearly, Exxon is built to last through any oil price cycle.    
Investor takeaway
Exxon, Oasis, and Suncor are thriving amid lower oil prices because of one really important key factor. While all three are focused on reducing their costs, the real differentiator between this trio and their weaker peers comes down to the integrated business model. Exxon and Suncor are clearly enjoying a natural hedge from their refining assets, while Oasis is benefiting from the lower costs of having its well services performed in house.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021



The S&P 500 ETF (NYSEMKT:SPY) sank 6.4% in the third quarter, but that didn't stop some of the world's richest investors from stepping up and buying stocks.
Billionaires Warren Buffett, George Soros, and Carl Icahn all put their cash to work last quarter, and because each of them has seen his fair share of market pops and drops, knowing what they're buying could help you figure out your next investment move.
No. 1: The Oracle of Omaha shifts his energy bet
Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway (NYSE:BRK.B) (NYSE:BRK.A) manages more than $100 billion in assets, and Buffett's legendary long-haul approach to investing and folksy demeanor have made him one of the most followed and liked people in finance.
Buffett tends to avoid businesses he doesn't understand, and that typically keeps Berkshire's portfolio focused on predictable businesses, such as insurance, industrial, and transportation companies.
In the past, that strategy has also led him to own energy stocks, including mega-large-cap oil and gas company ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM). However, swelling domestic production that's weighing down commodity prices has led Buffett to unload most of his energy stocks this year, and that has many thinking Buffett is sour on all energy companies.
Apparently, that's not the case.
While Buffett isn't interested in owning upstream oil and gas producers, he did make a big bet last quarter on Phillips 66 (NYSE:PSX), a company that operates refining, chemical, distribution, and retail energy businesses.
Buffett took more than a 10% stake in Phillips 66 that's worth more than $5.6 billion, and as a result, Phillips 66 is Berkshire Hathaway's sixth largest position.
Whether investors should join Buffett and buy Phillips 66 depends a lot on whether it can leverage lower input costs and steady demand for bigger margins. Typically, midstream and downstream operators benefit from falling input costs because prices at the pump tend to lag declines in upstream prices. For that reason, Phillips 66 may indeed be a good company to own.
SOURCE: GEORGESOROS.COM.
No. 2: Soros bets on Black Friday
Unlike Buffett, billionaire hedge-fund legend George Soros tends to shift around his portfolio pretty rapidly.
His quick-fire investment style means stocks he owns in any given quarter could as easily be sold the next, but that approach has been massively successful for him over his 50-plus=year career.
One of his most recent big buys is Amazon.com (NASDAQ:AMZN), the online retailing Goliath.
Ahead of the surging holiday sales season, Soros picked up $50 million in Amazon shares during the third quarter, and that investment may already be paying off, given that Amazon's shares have climbed to $660, up from $434 in June.
Admittedly, Soros may not stick around in Amazon for long (heck, he may already be selling it), but given that Amazon is a go-to retailer with an expanding reach into consumers' homes through Amazon Prime, I think it's a good bet that the company will deliver better-than-hoped-for financials in Q4. If so, then it's a name investors ought to consider buying, too.
No. 3: Icahn digs this miner
Few industries have been as hard hit by the slowing growth in China as mining. Falling demand has caused copper prices to tumble about 27% in the past year, and that, combined with a bad bet on oil and gas, has taken a big toll on copper mining giant Freeport McMoran (NYSE:FCX).
In the third quarter, Icahn bought 100 million sharea of Freeport McMoran, making him its biggest shareholder. 
Although demand for Freeport McMoran's commodities is struggling, Icahn thinks those struggles could be temporary, especially if he can persuade the company to restructure and cut costs further.
In October, Icahn won two seats on Freeport McMoran's board, and he's already advocating to cut management pay and capital spending. Pressure from Icahn could also be a catalyst for making significant changes in Freeport McMoran's oil and gas business, such as an IPO or an outright sale.
Previously, Freeport McMoran announced a capital spending cut of 29% for next year and plans to reduce production and eliminate 1,500 jobs. If Icahn accelerates this right-sizing and emerging markets recover, then Freeport McMoran could be a nice stock to own for the long term, too.


Before you consider Amazon.com, Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Amazon.com, Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


