ExxonMobil's (NYSE:XOM) dividend yield of 8% looks quite enticing for investors today -- in fact, it would be downright mouthwatering if the stock weren't so risky. But low oil prices and general volatility in the industry make the oil and gas giant (and its dividend) dangerous to rely on. In the past year, the stock has cratered by more than 45%. In comparison, the S&P 500's losses amount to less than 5% during the same period. Although Exxon's CEO recently reaffirmed the company's commitment to its dividend, investors shouldn't take a chance on it. Instead, consider buying shares of the three dividend stocks listed below.
Pfizer (NYSE:PFE) is a big name in healthcare, and that's a sector that's hard not to want to invest in right now. Healthcare companies are reminding investors how recession-proof some of them may be. These aren't, after all, discretionary expenses; people need drugs like Pfizer's for everything from treating cancer to clearing up infections. And with the company spinning off its Upjohn business, which focuses on off-patent medicines, Pfizer can focus on developing newer and better drugs for consumers, helping to drive growth in the years to come. 
Growth could be a big bonus for investors, as it's not something Pfizer investors have seen much of in recent years. The company's sales were down 3.5% in 2019, and in 2018, revenue rose by just 2.1%. But Pfizer's bottom line has remained consistent over the years, with the company posting a profit margin north of 20% in each of the past three years. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Strong financials are a key ingredient for a good dividend stock, and that's also why the company's been able to increase its dividends on an annual basis since 2010. Dividend payments of $0.16 more than a decade ago are now up to $0.38 per share. Investors are currently earning a dividend yield of 4.3%. While that may not be as high as Exxon's, it's still better than the 2% dividend yield that investors can typically expect from the average S&P 500 stock. 
3M (NYSE:MMM) may not be a healthcare stock, but the company's face masks are in high demand as consumers try to stay safe during the coronavirus pandemic. It's gotten so dire that President Trump has even tried to get 3M to stop exporting the masks to Canada and other parts of the world in order to secure as many as possible for the United States. In the final decision, 3M agreed to supplement its domestic production of masks with imported ones.
The company offers more than just masks, including adhesives and personal safety products that are used in industrial settings. But with an economic slowdown, there may be some challenges ahead in moving some of those products. That said, its broad mix of offerings makes 3M a company with a lot of diversification, which helps make the stock a stable buy.
Like Pfizer, 3M hasn't generated much growth over the years; its sales have been within a range of $30 billion to $33 billion for seven straight years. But its profit margin has remained very consistent, staying above 14% in each of the past 10 years. 
In February, 3M announced that it would be increasing its dividend for the 62nd straight year. Its dividend payment will rise by 2%, with investors to receive $1.47 every quarter for each share they own. Currently, the stock provides investors with a dividend yield of approximately 4% per year. 3M is a Dividend King, and it's one of the safest dividend stocks investors can buy today. 
Toronto-Dominion Bank (NYSE:TD) is another stock that's a better alternative for investors than Exxon. While the big bank faces headwinds as the Canadian and U.S. economies struggle in the face of the coronavirus pandemic, that won't change its long-term trajectory. As both economies recover, so too will TD's stock, as the bank has strong footprints in both countries. It's coming off a new four-year low, and for investors, now could be a great time to buy this top bank stock at a reduced price.
Although its dividend is based in Canadian dollars, U.S. investors can still expect to earn a yield of about 5.2% annually. The company recently raised its payouts, and it's been consistent in doing so since the end of the last financial crisis about 10 years ago.
TD's shown a bit more growth than the other two stocks on this list, with its revenue increasing by 5.7% in 2019. Its top line is also up 20% over the past three years. And like the other stocks on this list, profitability hasn't been a problem for TD, either. Its profit margin has come in above 28% in each of the past three years. 
Here's a glimpse at how each of the three stocks have performed so far this year, compared against Exxon and the S&P 500:

XOM data by YCharts
All three stocks are trading at discounts this year, with TD seeing the largest decline outside of Exxon. It's also trading at the lowest price-to-earnings (P/E) multiple at less than 10. Investors are paying 12 times earnings for Pfizer, while 3M's at a P/E of around 18. With a solid payout of more than 5% and a low valuation, TD will get you the most bang for your buck and is the best buy today.



Before you consider Pfizer Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Pfizer Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


A Dividend Aristocrat is a company in the S&P 500 that has paid and increased its base dividend every year for at least 25 consecutive years.
S&P Dow Jones Indices, which owns the S&P 500 index, reviews the list of qualifying companies every year and updates the list of companies that carry Dividend Aristocrat status. Their impressive track records of growth make Dividend Aristocrats some of the most attractive dividend stocks to own.
As of Jan. 22, 2021, there are 65 Dividend Aristocrats.
Here's the full list, sorted by how many consecutive years each has increased its dividend:
*WAS ADDED TO S&P 500, MAKING IT ELIGIBLE FOR DIVIDEND ARISTOCRATS LIST. SOURCE: S&P DOW JONES INDICES. 
There's also a Dividend Kings list. To be a Dividend King, a company has to have boosted that dividend every year for an incredible 50 years in a row.
Three companies were removed from the Dividend Aristocrats list for 2021:
Three new companies became eligible to join the Dividend Aristocrats list for 2021:
The standards make it difficult for companies to get on the list. But once they are on, they are likely to stay.
Below are the four criteria to become (and remain) a Dividend Aristocrat:
The Dividend Aristocrats list is updated at several frequencies by S&P Dow Jones Indices:
While the Dividend Aristocrat index, by nature, doesn't change much, more companies tend to lose their status during recessions. In 2009 and 2010, 19 total companies (half of which were banks or financial institutions) fell off the list after cutting dividends due to the global financial crisis. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Historically speaking, yes. But it depends on what you're looking for from your investment. 
Pros of investing in Dividend Aristocrats:
That being said, in recent history, Dividend Aristocrats have underperformed the S&P 500 in total returns: 

NOBL TOTAL RETURN PRICE DATA BY YCHARTS.
So why would investors still look at the S&P Dividend Aristocrats?
When it comes to dividend growth, Dividend Aristocrats absolutely shine. Since 2014, the Dividend Aristocrats Index has increased the dividend payout five times faster than the S&P 500. 

NOBL DIVIDEND DATA BY YCHARTS.
Yes, the ProShares S&P 500 Dividend Aristocrats ETF (NYSEMKT:NOBL) is a low-cost index fund that makes it simple to own the full Dividend Aristocrats list.
Those looking for a simple, low-cost way to invest in the entire Dividend Aristocrats universe should give this exchange traded fund (ETF) consideration. 
Your long- and short-term objectives, as well as the kinds of companies you want to own, come into play. 
For instance, if you're looking for immediate income, you may want to avoid the constituents with lower dividend payouts. If long-term growth is your focus, you may be better off buying Dividend Aristocrats with higher growth prospects, even if they have lower dividend payouts. 
Whether you're looking to pick individual stocks to suit your investing style and goals, or for other reasons such as socially responsible investing goals, Dividend Aristocrats can be an excellent starting point for finding the best-in-class dividend growth stocks. 

Where to invest $1,000 right now
When investing geniuses David and Tom Gardner have a stock tip, it can pay to listen. After all, the newsletter they have run for over a decade, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has quadrupled the market.*
David and Tom just revealed what they believe are the ten best stocks for investors to buy right now¡¦
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021

