
In a move that seems as unlikely as Hugh Hefner paying for research on whether breast implants give you back pain, ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) has agreed to release a report on how the company believes climate change will impact its business. 
The report will warn investors of the risks that stricter limits on carbon emissions would place on the company's business. ExxonMobil agreed to conduct and make public the research by the end of March.
The move was forced by Arjuna Capital, a sustainable wealth management firm, and As You Sow, a non-profit that promotes environmental and social corporate responsibility through shareholder advocacy, coalition building, and legal strategies, which jointly filed a shareholder resolution demanding a comprehensive "carbon asset risk report," CNN Money reported.
The report will show how ExxonMobil plans to deal with the fact that while it lists reserves of oil and gas as assets, those assets may not be usable without creating an environmental disaster. "Coal, oil, and gas reserves that are claimed as assets on the balance sheets of the top 100 coal, oil, and gas companies contain over three times the total amount of carbon that scientists believe can be released without climate catastrophe," As You Sow reported on its website . 
In 2012 World Energy Outlook, an international energy agency, echoed that opinion saying that "no more than one-third of proven reserves of fossil fuels can be consumed prior to 2050 if the world is to achieve the two degree Celsius goal," generally recognized as the level beyond which global warming will have dire ramifications.
Why ExxonMobil is doing this
In short ExxonMobil is bowing to pressure from activists. As You Sow and Arjuna had filed a resolution on climate change that would have been discussed at the company's next annual shareholders meeting. In exchange for ExxonMobil releasing the report on carbon emissions, the activists have agreed to withdraw the resolution, The New York Times reported .
This is not happening because ExxonMobil suddenly realized that it owed the public an apology . The company was dragged into releasing the report and is only doing so to avoid a potentially worse showdown over the issue at its investor meeting.
As You Sow has filed similar resolutions with Chevron (NYSE:CVX), Anadarko (NYSE:APC), Hess (NYSE:HES), and CONSOL Energy (NYSE:CNX).   
It's not just about the environment
While the activists forcing the issue have an environmental agenda, there are also bottom line business reasons ExxonMobil shareholders would want access to this information. Since the company sells fossil fuel and places a value to its fossil fuel assets, any change to how those values are tabulated could potentially mean billions of dollars in value lost. 
Some oil reserves are more expensive to extract than others and if carbon emission policies are changed, could become uneconomical to run. With President Barack Obama seeking to reduce carbon emission by as much as 80%, The Times reported, ExxonMobil may be sitting on assets that have the potential to become worthless (or at least worth less).
"Shareholder value is at stake if companies are not prepared for a low-carbon scenario," said Natasha Lamb, director of equity research and shareholder engagement at Arjuna Capital, in a release.
The report will also show how increased restrictions on carbon emissions would impact the projects the company intends to invest in and answer whether any new fossil fuel reserves the company invests in are at risk of losing value. 
