The stock market is getting impatient with ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM). 
Fellow oil majors Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.A) (NYSE:RDS.B), Total SA (NYSE:TOT), and Chevron (NYSE:CVX) have all released plans to sharply reduce 2020 capital spending in the wake of the oil price crash. In response, the market sent their shares soaring. Over the week between March 19 and 25, their share prices rose between 25.8% (Chevron) and 68.8% (Shell's Class A Shares). Exxon, on the other hand, saw shares rise just 12% during that period.
Here's why Exxon's in a risky spot, and why that could cause problems for its dividend.
EXXONMOBIL HAS RELIABLY INCREASED ITS DIVIDEND FOR DECADES. COULD THAT TREND BE ABOUT TO END? IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Before oil prices collapsed in early March, all of the oil majors were planning to increase capital spending in 2020 over their 2019 levels. Exxon, which has struggled in recent years with declining production, was particularly keen to spend. Speaking at ExxonMobil's annual investor day on March 5, CEO Darren Woods announced that the company would be "leaning into this market when others have pulled back," to the tune of $30 billion to $35 billion in annual spending. That almost certainly would have involved outspending the company's cash flow at times. 
Investors didn't think much of that idea, and the company's shares have fallen more than 25% since March 5. On March 16, S&P Global downgraded Exxon's credit rating from AA+ to AA: still investment-grade, but a signal of the market's discomfort with the prospect of rising debt. Almost immediately, Exxon put out a press release vowing to look into "all appropriate steps to significantly reduce capital and operating expenses in the near term." 
That announcement seemed to slow the pace of the company's share-price decline. But more than a week later, Exxon is still being coy about exactly what cuts -- if any -- it plans to make.
The only thing that's going to reassure the market is a concrete plan of action, but Exxon's oil major peers have set the bar pretty high by announcing spending cuts of around 20% each. Shell is cutting an estimated $8 billion to $9 billion in capital and operating expenses in 2020; Chevron similarly promised a $5 billion reduction in spending; Total is cutting $800 million. In addition, Shell and Chevron have suspended their share buyback programs, which ate up billions of dollars of cash flow in 2019.
So, anything less than a 20% reduction in capital spending will probably be seen by the market as a disappointment, and is likely to lead to a share price decline. However, Woods is clearly eager to follow the time-tested Exxon playbook of spending money throughout the cycle, regardless of oil prices. That's been a winning strategy for the company in the past, which makes it uncertain how much cutting Woods will be willing to do. In all likelihood, he's going to try to gauge exactly how much (or how little) he needs to cut to satisfy the market and announce only that much and nothing else. 
How much would satisfy the market? Well, Exxon spent $31.1 billion in capital and exploration in 2019, which was a 20% increase from 2018's $25.9 billion. So a 20% cut would be roughly $6 billion.
Would cutting just $6 billion from its capital budget be enough to secure Exxon's dividend? 
The company paid out $14.7 billion in dividends in 2019. Together with the $31.1 billion in capital and exploration, that totaled $45.8 billion. However, the company only brought in $29.7 billion in operating cash flow, $16.1 billion less than those two expense categories. It made up the difference primarily through $3.7 billion in asset sales and an $8.7 billion increase in net debt.
So, even a $6 billion reduction in capital expenditures would still leave Exxon -- assuming oil prices were comparable to last year's -- with a $10 billion hole to fill. And, of course, oil prices today are much lower than they were at any time during 2019, which means that hole is likely to be much larger than $10 billion. The company's current cash on hand of $3.1 billion won't be much help here.
However, Exxon's current debt load of $45.3 billion, although record high for the company, equates to less than 1.1 times EBITDA, which is on the low end of its peer group (only Chevron's debt-to-EBITDA ratio of 0.9 is lower). Despite its recent credit downgrade, it maintains a rating of Aaa/AA, which is still very high. The company would likely have no problem securing financing to maintain its dividend.
Exxon is going to have to come clean about its specific 2020 spending plans -- and sooner rather than later. If it comes out with anything less than a 20% reduction in capital spending, the market is likely to punish the stock. On the other hand, in the unlikely event the company surprises with, say, a spending cut of $10 billion (about 27%) or more, investors will probably send shares upward.
That said, moves that placate the market -- which can pay off in the short term -- may not be the best long-term strategy, for Exxon right now or for companies in general.
Either way, ExxonMobil seems likely to continue to maintain its status as a Dividend Aristocrat, provided the current economic situation doesn't drag on for too many months. If it does, ExxonMobil -- and the oil industry in general -- will have bigger problems than just a potential dividend cut.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


It's been a whirlwind of a past six weeks for Wall Street and Main Street. Since topping out on Feb. 19, it took just over three weeks for the iconic Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI) to dip into bear market territory, and just over four weeks for the 123-year-old index to shed in excess of 30% of its value. At no point in its storied history have we ever seen a 20% or 30% drop from recent high materialize so quickly.
As you're likely well aware, the spread of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is squarely to blame. Not only has this illness claimed more than 3,000 American lives, as of March 30, but the stringent mitigation measures put in place in a number of major cities and states threatens to bring economic activity to a halt. Over the next couple of weeks, we could see some truly jaw-droppingly bad economic data.
And yet amid the carnage, there's the solace in knowing that there will be brighter days ahead. No matter what sort of economic crisis has been thrown at the Dow Jones Industrial Average over more than a century, it's always eventually put bear markets in the rearview mirror and pushed higher. The key, of course, is that investors have to hang onto their investments for the long run to take part in these bull-market rallies.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
What the coronavirus crash has done is make a number of the Dow's 30 components considerably more attractive on a valuation basis. In fact, I'd go so far as to call the following three Dow stocks screaming buys.
First up is payment processing giant American Express (NYSE:AXP), which had lost as much as half of its value between the Feb. 19 peak and its March 18 trough. AmEx has found itself in Wall Street's crosshairs for two reasons. First, it's liable to see payment processing revenue decline as people hunker down in their homes and wait out the spread of COVID-19. Second, and perhaps more worryingly, American Express is also a lender, meaning it's likely to see credit delinquencies rise given the lack of economic activity and the certain rise in the unemployment rate.
While these are tangible concerns that should have a negative impact on American Express and its payment processing peers, I don't view the scenario as dire as it's been made out by Wall Street. That's because AmEx primarily seeks out more affluent clientele for its credit cards. Although this doesn't exclude the company from the pain of a rising wave of credit delinquencies, there's likely going to be less disruption for AmEx than a number of other lenders. Affluent individuals are more likely to have emergency savings, and are therefore less likely to not pay their bills.
The passage of the record $2.2 trillion CARES Act will also help small businesses, families, and working Americans meet their obligations. It's certainly not a long-term solution, but it's a step in the right direction.
Right now, investors can buy into American Express for less than 10 times next year's profit potential and roughly three times book value. It's been more than a decade since you could buy AmEx for a single-digit forward P/E ratio and nine years since you could nab this stock for three times its book value.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Perhaps the ugliest sector of all during the COVID-19 crash is energy, with integrated oil and gas company ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) taking it on the chin. Shares of ExxonMobil are down close to 50% on a year-to-date basis with West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude pushing down to about $20 per barrel. That's its lowest mark since 2002. With crude demand falling through the floor due to the coronavirus, and Saudi Arabia and Russia engaged in a crude-pricing war, the near-term looks ugly for oil stocks.
But there are a couple of tricks up ExxonMobil's sleeve, even in an environment where WTI is going for approximately $20 a barrel. One thing to realize is that this is a fully integrated energy company. Even though upstream drilling operations provide the bulk of ExxonMobil's growth opportunity, it's usually able to benefit from weaker crude pricing with its downstream refining and petrochemical operations. These downstream operations should come in especially handy later this year, assuming global economic activity picks back up.
ExxonMobil also has serious levers it can pull on the cost-cutting front. The company had previously pledged to spend between $30 billion and $33 billion on projects in 2020 and is obviously looking to slash this outlay by billions in the months to come. It also spent nearly $14.7 billion in 2019 paying its dividend. While I get that ExxonMobil is a Dividend Aristocrat and is likely unwilling to sacrifice its payout, it could easily conserve its cash by cutting or shelving its payout. 
Currently near an 18-year low, ExxonMobil presents incredible value for long-term minded investors who can look beyond COVID-19 to an almost-certain increase in demand for fossil fuel products.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Lastly, money-center bank JPMorgan Chase (NYSE:JPM) is looking particularly attractive after shedding more than a third of its value during this six-week swoon.
Right now, there are two big knocks against banks. First, they're a cyclical industry, and pretty much everyone on Wall Street seems convinced that we're headed for a steep, but hopefully short recession. Second, the Federal Reserve lowered its federal funds rate back to an all-time record low range of 0% to 0.25%. Put simply, it means that net interest margins for banks will be squeezed, leading to less in the way of net interest income.
But JPMorgan Chase isn't your typical bank. Among the largest national money-center banks, it's consistently vying for the No. 1 or No. 2 spot in terms of return on assets. This means it's better than most banks at generating a profit from its assets.
At the same time, JPMorgan Chase has been aggressively pushing into new markets. It's one of the few big banks to be opening up more branches than it's closing, and has been willingly spending on technology investments designed to drive digital and mobile banking. As a reminder, digital and mobile banking lead to significantly lower transaction costs for banks than in-person or even phone-based transactions.
