It's not hard to find a cheap stock; there are companies careening toward bankruptcy all the time. The difficult thing is to find a cheap stock that's worth buying. Right now, there are two energy industry giants that are on solid financial ground but seem a little too unloved. If you are looking for incredibly cheap energy stocks, then take a gander at ExxonMobil Corporation (NYSE:XOM) and Enterprise Products Partners L.P. (NYSE:EPD). Here's what you need to know to get started.
Exxon is one of the world's largest integrated energy companies. The stock's 4.3% yield is toward the high end of its historical range, suggesting a relatively cheap price. Adding to this view is the fact that its price to tangible book value has fallen nearly 40% over the past five years and hasn't been this low since roughly the 1990s.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
However, cheap doesn't mean good. But that's where Exxon shines. The company is financially strong, with long-term debt at just 10% of the capital structure. And its business is diversified across the upstream (oil drilling) and downstream (chemicals and refining) businesses, providing notable diversification to help soften the blow of volatile oil and natural gas prices. This business is built to survive hard times, like the deep oil downturn that started in mid-2014, or the oil bear market that's currently pushing oil prices lower.   
One of the biggest proofs of Exxon's strength comes in the form of a quarterly check. Exxon has increased its dividend every single year for 36 consecutive years. In fact, it continued to increase right through the difficult 2014 oil bear market while many peers were hitting the pause button or, worse, cutting their dividends.   

EPD PRICE TO TANGIBLE BOOK VALUE DATA BY YCHARTS.
A key reason Exxon is cheap today is because its production has been falling for a couple of years. That's bad news to be sure, but management has laid out a plan to fix the issue. Always taking a slow and steady approach, the company is starting to show some progress along the path it outlined: Production increased sequentially between the second and third quarters. The problem is that Exxon's plan extends out to 2025, and investors aren't generally that patient. If you can think long term, though, financially strong Exxon is cheap today, and you can collect a generous dividend yield while you wait for it to execute on its turnaround plan.   
Enterprise Products Partners is one of the largest midstream companies in North America. The roughly 6.7% distribution yield the limited partnership offers today is near the highest levels of the last decade. And its price to enterprise value has fallen nearly 50% over the past five years.
Although Enterprise is focused on the midstream segment of the energy industry, it owns one of the largest and most geographically diverse portfolios, including pipelines, processing, storage, and transportation assets. It even owns a fleet of tanker ships. The best part is that the vast majority of its business is fee-based. As a toll taker, Enterprise doesn't care about the price of oil and gas, just the demand for it. And right now, demand for energy infrastructure in the United States is high and growing. Leverage, meanwhile, is modest compared to peers, with debt to EBITDA (currently around 3.8 times) toward the low end of the industry. 
Like Exxon, Enterprise's strength comes through quarterly. It has increased its distribution every year for 21 consecutive years. As long as Enterprise can keep growing its asset base, it should be able to continue rewarding investors with distribution growth. Right now, though, it has dialed back distribution growth to the low single digits. Investors had become used to mid-single-digit growth.

EPD DIVIDEND PER SHARE (ANNUAL) DATA BY YCHARTS.
However, that change is temporary as Enterprise looks to shift toward a self-funding model that will make it an even safer investment option in the midstream space. Management expects the shift to be completed by the end of 2019, at which point it will be able to pick up the distribution growth pace again. In the meantime, you can collect a huge yield while you wait for this cheap partnership to get even better.   
Although the cheap prices at which Exxon and Enterprise are trading today are the lead into the stocks right now, them being "cheap" isn't the only reason to buy them. Both are large, diversified, and financially strong companies. They have each proven that returning value to investors via dividends is important. And they are both working on a path to a better future. Impatient investors don't appear willing to wait for these plans to play out and have pushed the prices to attractive levels. But the relatively high yields should make it easy for those with a long-term mindset to stick around through the business transitions that are currently underway at Exxon and Enterprise.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


The year 2018 has quickly gone from one of considerable gains for the energy market to a bear market with oil prices below $50 a barrel and stocks taking a sharp turn toward 52-week lows. At the same time, renewable energy stocks have struggled in their own right trying to navigate the many regulatory changes over the past year.
While this sharp drop may look ugly when checking your portfolio, it can also present investors with a few buying opportunities. So we asked three of our Motley Fool contributors to each highlight an energy stock that looks attractive this month. Here's why they picked ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), Brookfield Renewable Partners (NYSE:BEP), and Tellurian (NASDAQ:TELL).
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Rich Smith (ExxonMobil): I realize this is kind of a "gimme" when talking about energy stocks, but I really believe ExxonMobil is an important energy stock to watch in December. Why? Well, consider what's been happening with the price of oil lately.
Over the past couple of months, we've watched oil prices for WTI crude plummet from north of $75 a barrel to just a couple of bucks above $50. ExxonMobil stock has come along for the ride, declining 11% from early October to early December. And yet, just this week, Citigroup came out with a forecast predicting oil prices will finally settle down in the new year -- not at today's price, though, but at something closer to a $60-a-barrel average.
Assuming Citi is right about that, this means a near-20% hike in the price of oil could begin building -- and probably soon, what with this winter looking like a cold one and OPEC promising to cut production of oil. It seems to me, therefore, that if the price is right, then right about now should be a fine time to buy Exxon stock, before higher oil prices translate into a higher Exxon share price.
And Exxon's stock price does look right to me. Priced at just 14.1 times earnings today, Exxon stock pays a 4.2% annual dividend, and is pegged for 23% long-term earnings growth on Yahoo! Finance. Combined, that works out to better than a 27% total return likely from Exxon -- a bargain at 14.1 times earnings.
Jason Hall (Brookfield Renewable Partners LP): Units (MLP-speak for "shares") of Brookfield Renewable have fallen more than 26% over the past year, in large part because interest rates have steadily gone higher. And while rising rates aren't great for Brookfield Renewable, which uses a substantial amount of debt to fund acquisitions and project development, there's a very clear argument that the market's sell-off of this well-run renewable energy producer has created an excellent opportunity for investors. 
To start, the sell-off has pushed its dividend yield to 7.6% at recent prices. And every other time in its history that the yield has climbed this much, it has represented an excellent opportunity to buy: 

BEP DATA BY YCHARTS.
This is because, in short, Mister Market has a habit of letting short-term things cause it to miss the excellent job Brookfield Renewables' management has done of allocating capital and steadily building a stronger, bigger business. Through its most-recent quarter, Brookfield Renewable had some 90% of the power its assets generate sold under long-term contracts, which generate enough cash to support its quarterly payout and then some.
Last quarter, it paid out about 87% of cash, and management expects to get that ratio down to 80% within a few quarters, freeing up even more capital to reinvest in high-return renewable energy assets. 
But even without big growth, Brookfield Renewables is very cheap, selling for less than 11 times expected full-year 2018 cash flows. Combined with that 7.6% yield, it wouldn't have to achieve very much growth at all to deliver double-digit returns for investors. That makes it my top energy stock right now. 
Tyler Crowe (Tellurian Inc.): When you are a company that's just a business plan, your stock is bound to be volatile. That has been the case with Tellurian so far in 2018. The company intends to construct a liquefied natural gas (LNG) export facility in the U.S. Gulf Coast, but it is starting from scratch. The path ahead of it is incredibly challenging, as it will need to secure partners, permits, and capital to construct the facility and make this plan a reality. 
With so many things still up in the air, it's not surprising that the stock has been incredibly volatile for much of the year. 

TELL DATA BY YCHARTS.
In terms of the business, not much has changed in 2018. It is still working on negotiating equity partners for its facility and awaiting the necessary permits to export LNG. The one notable change to the business plan is that instead of raising all of its funding needs through equity partners, it expects to take on some debt in order to partially fund the project. 
The reason investors should probably keep an eye on this stock is that we should expect some major events that could be stock catalysts over the next few months. In January, Tellurian expects a final environmental impact statement, which is the final regulatory hurdle. We should also expect announcements related to its project partners soon. In fact, the company already announced a memorandum of understanding with commodity trading house Vitol that will likely result in a long-term takeaway contract. 
U.S. natural gas is one of the cheapest energy sources in the world, which makes exporting it a highly lucrative business. If Tellurian's plan can fall into place over the next month or so as planned, then this will be a stock to put on your radar. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


