So much for a rally to start the year. After a strong Thursday performance, the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI) sank on Friday following news that a U.S. airstrike had killed Iranian General Qasem Soleimani, ramping up tensions between the two countries. Also dampening investors' spirits was a weak reading on the Institute for Supply Management's purchasing managers' index, which measures U.S. factory activity.
The Dow was down 0.84% at 11 a.m. EST, with all 30 components in negative territory. Outperforming the index were Apple (NASDAQ:AAPL) and ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM). Two analyst price target bumps prevented Apple stock from falling too much, and Exxon's disclosure of significant gains from an asset sale kept losses for the oil stock small.
With Apple stock soaring 85% in 2019, it's not too surprising to see bullish analysts piling on after the fact. On Friday, Apple received two price target boosts from analysts at Bank of America and RBC Capital Markets. Both now see Apple rising to $330 per share, up from roughly $300 today.
This analyst optimism wasn't enough to lift Apple on a rough day for the stock market. Shares of the tech giant were down 0.6% in the morning.
Strong iPhone demand was the core reason for the price target bumps from both analysts, with RBC noting that the latest iPhone 11 was producing more social media mentions than its predecessor. RBC expects Apple to report solid holiday-quarter sales thanks to the iPhone.
IMAGE SOURCE: APPLE.
Bank of America based its price target bump on other parts of Apple's business as well. BofA expects strong results from wearables and the App Store, and in the long run, it sees 5G adoption benefiting Apple. Apple is expected to launch a 5G-capable iPhone in 2020, although the jury is still out on how much consumers really care about 5G technology.
While iPhone demand appears to be strong in the U.S., China is a different story. Credit Suisse said last month that iPhone sales in China had plunged 35.4% in November, a sign that Apple's comeback in the country is in jeopardy. It remains to be seen whether strong iPhone demand elsewhere can offset weakness in China.
While analysts are generally optimistic on Apple, the stock is more expensive than it's been in more than a decade. Shares trade for around 25 times trailing-12-month earnings, a lofty valuation for a company worth well over $1 trillion.
Shares of Exxon were down just 0.25% Friday morning, outperforming the broader market. A combination of renewed tensions in the Middle East and an update from the company on asset sales seems to be driving the outperformance.
In an SEC filing on Friday, Exxon laid out various factors that will affect its earnings in the fourth quarter relative to the third quarter. Exxon expects to realize a gain of between $3.4 billion and $3.6 billion from the sale of oil and gas assets in Norway, boosting fourth-quarter results. This gain will help offset lower expected margins in the refining and chemical businesses.
Exxon is targeting $25 billion of total asset sales as it looks to shed noncore operations and use the proceeds to invest in projects with higher potential returns on investment. Shares of Exxon were up just 2.3% in 2019, badly trailing the Dow's 22% return.



Before you consider Apple Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Apple Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


International energy giant ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) has plans to spend up to $35 billion a year through 2025 on a massive capital investment program. The goal is to reverse a multiyear decline in its production. The only problem is that oil and natural gas prices are low right now, so finding the cash for this spending will be difficult and, increasingly, includes asset sales. Here's what Exxon can do to fund its investment plans and why investors shouldn't be too worried about the moves it's making.   
The third quarter was a tough one for oil companies in general, and Exxon didn't avoid the pain. Its third-quarter earnings were down roughly 50% year over year. The upstream operation (oil and natural gas drilling) was the hardest hit, representing roughly two-thirds of the overall decline. The main culprit was "lower liquids and gas realizations," which is a fancy way of saying that the prices of these commodities fell. Unfortunately, downstream operations (chemicals and refining) weren't an offset, with earnings at both falling year over year as well. The main cause here was weaker margins. Simply put, it was a rough quarter.   
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
There was a positive hidden in the bad news: Exxon's production increased about 3% year over year in the third quarter. That shows that its capital spending plans are bearing fruit. This progress, however, wasn't enough to overcome the impact of volatile energy prices. Oil and gas prices are, for better or worse, the biggest driving force at Exxon. 
This highlights the big problem this energy giant is facing today. It is investing heavily to increase production at a time when oil prices are relatively low. How Exxon will come up with the cash to keep spending is an increasing concern on Wall Street. The answer isn't easy.
The first issue that needs to be addressed is that Exxon doesn't really have much of a choice when it comes to investing in production growth. For several years, its production was in decline, which is a trend that can't be allowed to linger for too long. At the very least it needs to work to keep production roughly flat. An oil company that continually produces less and less oil isn't on a sustainable path. 
The second issue is how to pay for its investment plans, which are huge. The most obvious choice is to simply take on additional debt. Exxon has the balance sheet strength to do this, with a financial debt-to-equity ratio of roughly 0.15 times. Most of its closet peers have ratios that are at least twice that level. Simplistically speaking, Exxon could double its roughly $26 billion in debt and still be toward the lower end of its peers leverage-wise.   

XOM FINANCIAL DEBT TO EQUITY (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS
Before you say that $26 billion doesn't even cover one year of the company's spending plans at a run rate of $35 billion, Exxon doesn't need to fund all of its spending with debt. It is using cash flow to pay for as much of its capital program as it can. For example, in the third quarter the oil giant generated roughly $9 billion in cash flow. Around $3.7 billion of cash went toward shareholder distributions, with another $6 billion being spent on capital projects. Those numbers still don't square, since cash going out the door exceeded cash coming in -- so Exxon also sold $1.9 billion in debt and $500 million worth of assets, which more than filled the void (its cash balance actually increased sequentially). 
Assuming that it needs to sell around $2 billion worth of debt each quarter to keep the math simple, that's roughly $8 billion a year in additional debt. Exxon's current investment program lasts through 2025, so it has about five years of spending left. That means about $40 billion worth of debt to get through 2025. These are very rough estimates intended to make a larger point; there's clearly a lot more going on here. Still, that would more than double the current debt Exxon has. However, even that would still leave financial debt-to-equity ratios around the levels of its more heavily leveraged peers.
Only Exxon isn't looking to use leverage to fund all of its investment plans; it also intends to sell assets. The original goal was to sell around $15 billion of assets. If you use that offset the debt needs in the simple model just outlined, you bring debt issuance down to $25 billion. That's roughly doubling the company's current debt load, which would leave Exxon toward the low end of peers on the metric. 
More recently, though, Exxon has reportedly upped its asset sale goal to $25 billion. This would mean even less need for debt and was likely driven by investor concerns over the company's increasing leverage. Exxon's conservative financial profile is one of its stock's key selling points, so taking on materially more debt is a tough sell on Wall Street. But here's the big question: Is this decision a sign of trouble? 
Clearly, Exxon is stating that it needs more cash to help offset the hit from its spending plans. That's not a great situation to be in, largely driven by the fact that oil prices are relatively weak today. However, you need to step back and look at what is going on from a big-picture perspective. As management has explained before, Exxon isn't selling assets willy nilly. Every single sale is being compared to other opportunities in its portfolio, including the ones in which it is investing today but that aren't yet producing. 
Exxon's take is that what it is selling, or plans to sell, isn't as valuable as what it's being compared against -- the oil company is upgrading its portfolio as it is selling. Backing that up is Exxon's continuing to find new oil in its biggest development projects, increasing the size of these opportunities. So selling older fields isn't really as big a deal as it may at first seem. And as these assets come on line -- combined with investments the company is making in its downstream operations -- more cash should be available to put toward the company's massive spending plans. Yes, it is tough right now, but Exxon looks like it is still heading in a good direction. 
It wouldn't be accurate to say that Exxon is riding high today; there's clearly a mix of good and bad news. Right now the bad news is weighing heavily on its financial results and investor perceptions. But from a big-picture perspective, Exxon remains in decent financial shape and shouldn't have any problems supporting its spending plans.
While the increase in asset sales could be viewed as a sign of financial strain, it's more likely a mix of assuaging investors and a reflection of the strength of its investment pipeline. Investors shouldn't read too deeply into the issue, since production from some of Exxon's big projects is expected to start adding more materially to results in 2020. Production in Guyana, for example, only started in December 2019, and production from its onshore U.S. fields is still ramping up. Assuming that leads to more robust production growth, Exxon remains on a solid path.   



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


The energy industry is decidedly out of favor today, even though the world still needs the oil and natural gas that it creates. That presents an opportunity for investors with a contrarian bent. But buying any old energy stock isn't the way to go -- you want to own financially strong names that can handle a little near-term adversity. Here are three companies with big dividend yields that should muddle through this rough patch with relative ease. 
With a yield of roughly 5%, international energy major ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) is one of the largest and most diversified oil and gas companies in the world. Operations that span from the drill bit (upstream) to the gas pump (downstream) help provide some stability to the company's results over time, since low oil prices result in reduced costs for the company's refining and chemicals operations. Having assets spread across the globe, meanwhile, allows the company to tap into economic growth around the world. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
Exxon, however, isn't the only company that can claim these traits. What helps set Exxon apart from many of its peers is its conservative approach. One of the best examples of this is the oil giant's rock-solid balance sheet. Financial debt to equity stands at just about 0.15 times, which is well below the levels of most of the energy majors (Chevron, at about the same level, is the only competitor that's in the same ballpark, leverage-wise). In fact, that figure is low for any industry. Management's conservative approach is one of the reasons why Exxon has been able to increase its dividend every year for 36 years and counting -- a record that no peer can match. 
To be fair, Exxon is spending a lot of money right now on drilling for new oil, and that's likely to mean more debt over the near term. But management believes it has an incredibly strong set of investment opportunities right now, and early progress on its capital investment plans has been good. If you can think long-term with a company that thinks long-term, then Exxon could be a great high-yield addition to your portfolio today.
Despite all of its diversification, Exxon's top- and bottom-lines will always be highly dependent on energy prices. That might turn more conservative types off. That's where 6.2%-yielding Enterprise Products Partners (NYSE:EPD) comes in. This master limited partnership operates in the midstream space, helping to move energy products from where they are drilled to where they get used. The key, however, is that roughly 85% of its gross operating margin is fee-based, meaning that it gets paid for the use of its assets. The prices of the products passing through its system of pipes, storage, transportation, and processing facilities isn't all that important -- demand for energy is the key factor to watch, and that remains fairly strong.
Meanwhile, Enterprise is one of the most conservative names in the midstream space. The partnership's debt to EBITDA ratio is around 3.4 times, near the low end of its peer group. Enterprise also covered its distribution by a massive 1.7 times through the first nine months of 2019. For reference, 1.2 times is considered strong coverage. Put simply, Enterprise is a rock-solid partnership, which helps explain how it has managed to increase its distribution annually for 22 consecutive years. 
Looking to the future, Enterprise is currently spending around $9 billion on capital projects. This is a lot of money, but hardly unusual. Enterprise has successfully spent nearly $70 billion building its business (via acquisitions and construction projects) since its IPO in 1998. There's no reason to doubt that it will continue to execute well at this point. And as it expands its portfolio of revenue-generating assets, it expands its ability to pay distributions. Enterprise is a strong option for conservative income investors. 
The last name here, Helmerich & Payne (NYSE:HP), is for investors that can handle uncertainty. The company builds, leases, and operates drilling rigs for companies like Exxon. Demand for drilling service providers tends to go up and down with energy prices, since low oil prices often lead drillers to pull back on spending. That, in turn, reduces demand for the services Helmerich & Payne provides. Right now demand is weak and investors are concerned that Helmerich & Payne's dividend won't hold up, which is why it yields a hefty 6.3% today.
That said, the company has increased its dividend annually for an incredible 46 years and counting. There have been a lot of oil bull and bear markets over that span, and the dividend has survived them all. A big piece of that is, as should come as no surprise by now, a solid financial foundation. Helmerich & Payne's financial debt to equity ratio is just about 0.10 times -- low for any company in any industry. The company's closest peer on this metric, meanwhile, comes in at around 0.5 times.

HP FINANCIAL DEBT TO EQUITY (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS
As for the safety of the dividend, some investors will likely complain that earnings aren't covering the dividend today. That's true -- the company's payout ratio is terrible. But dividends don't come from earnings, they come from cash flow, and the cash dividend payout ratio (which looks at dividends in relation to free cash flow) is roughly 80%, which is pretty normal for Helmerich & Payne. Yes, times are tough right now, but this financially strong drilling service provider has the financial strength to muddle through. 
Meanwhile, it has one of the most advanced drilling fleets in the U.S. onshore market. This fact has allowed Helmerich & Payne to gain over five percentage points of market share since late 2014 (when oil prices were much higher) despite relatively weak energy prices. Although income investors will need to be able to stomach the ups and downs of the oil market here, Helmerich & Payne appears built to survive and thrive in any environment.
The one theme that holds for Exxon, Enterprise, and Helmerich & Payne is that each has a strong financial foundation. Those foundations are what underpin the income that each throws off to investors. All three should be able to survive the current weak energy market and come out the other side stronger competitors. 
That said, Enterprise's fee-based business model should be the most attractive to conservative investors. Exxon's large and diversified business would be appropriate for investors willing to take on moderate risk in search of yield. And Helmerich & Payne is most appropriate for investors with strong constitutions, noting that its price would likely advance rapidly should oil prices (and demand for its services) rebound. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


