Although neither company is commenting officially on the deal, The Wall Street Journal is reporting that Apple is in talks with Comcast over a streaming TV service that would use an Apple set-top box. The deal would give Apple priority treatment for its content on Comcast's network.
On Monday's edition of Investor Beat, host Chris Hill and Motley Fool analysts Matt Argersinger and Taylor Muckerman discuss what each side would get out of the deal. While such an agreement would be a clear win for Apple, helping the company break into a space it has wanted to be in for years, the benefits aren't so clear for Comcast. The guys also discuss how the massive proposed deal for Comcast to buy Time Warner Cable plays into this arrangement, and just how likely that behemoth acquisition is to get past regulators.
Then, Matt and Taylor look at four stocks making moves on the market today. Bank of America was the No. 1 traded stock on the NYSE today, after the bank received a downgrade from Atlantic Equities. Many investors are hoping to see a dividend increase from the bank following the banking stress test results later this week, but after the first round of stress test results didn't come out in Bank of America's favor nearly as strongly as many had hoped, the dividend raise may now be in question. Shares of Herbalife rose today after the company agreed to nominate three of Carl Icahn's designees to its board of directors. Microvision was up big today, after the tiny tech company announced a deal with UPS. And Pandora stock took a hit today, just two days after the Internet radio giant announced it will raise subscription fees because of the rising cost of music.
And finally, Taylor and Matt each discuss one stock they'll be watching closely this week. Taylor looks into ExxonMobil in the wake of the oil spill in the Houston shipping channel, while Matt is keeping an eye on Bank of Internet, as its recent 20% sell-off could represent a very interesting buying opportunity for investors.



Before you consider Apple Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Apple Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


In this segment from Monday's Investor Beat, Motley Fool analysts Taylor Muckerman and Matt Argersinger discuss two stocks they'll be watching closely this week. Taylor looks into ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) in the wake of the oil spill in the Houston shipping channel, while Matt is keeping an eye on Bank of Internet (NYSE:AX), as its recent 20% sell-off could represent a very interesting buying opportunity for investors.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


