The stock market fell precipitously on Thursday morning, responding to increasingly contentious rhetoric on the trade front between the U.S. and China. Chinese officials urged their American counterparts to change their attitude with respect to what they see as recent provocations, and that signaled the likelihood of continued gridlock and no potential trade deal for the foreseeable future. As of 11:45 a.m. EDT, the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI) was down 366 points to 25,411. The S&P 500 (SNPINDEX:^GSPC) fell 38 points to 2,818, and the Nasdaq Composite (NASDAQINDEX:^IXIC) lost 110 points to 7,641.
Companies across all industries are seeing an impact from the tensions between the world's two largest economic powers, and various markets are reacting in different ways. For ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), a big drop in crude oil prices could bring weaker financial results in the future, while Chipotle Mexican Grill (NYSE:CMG) faces a health-related threat that could make it harder for the restaurant chain to do business the way it wants.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Shares of ExxonMobil were down more than 2% on Thursday morning, leading most of its energy stock peers lower. The primary factor was a huge drop in the price of crude oil, with West Texas Intermediate prices falling more than $3 per barrel to just above the $58-per-barrel mark.
Energy traders attributed the move in oil to several factors. Broader trade-related conflict between the U.S. and China could worsen already weak economic conditions in many parts of the world, and that in turn could reduce demand for energy products. The latest readings on domestic energy supplies were also less supportive of the oil market, and some traders also believe that the relationship between the U.S. and Iran could prove less confrontational than originally feared.
For ExxonMobil's part, the oil giant has worked hard to set itself up for whatever the future brings. In its most recent earnings report, the company suffered a setback from especially difficult conditions in refining, but it's still investing substantial resources toward building up its reserves and finding new growth opportunities. Shareholders today don't seem convinced that ExxonMobil can weather a storm in the energy industry, but the global leader is in better condition than most to deal with a sustained period of low crude oil prices.
Meanwhile, Chipotle Mexican Grill saw its shares sink 6%. The Mexican fast-casual restaurant chain took heat from a stock analyst about the potential impact that animal-related diseases overseas could have on its supply chain.
Analysts at BMO Capital Markets downgraded Chipotle from market perform to underperform, pointing to the epidemic of African swine fever that's moving through several key pork production areas in Asia. In cutting their price target on the stock by $55 per share to $620, the BMO analysts noted that Chipotle has substantial needs for pork, and it's historically remained exposed to shifts in commodity prices very quickly after price movements occur. The concern is that if enough pigs die from the disease, remaining supplies will be inadequate to meet global demand.
For its part, Chipotle disputes BMO's analysis. A company representative told me that pork costs make up just 2% of the restaurant chain's total food expenses. Moreover, with pricing agreements in place and an emphasis on obtaining higher-quality pork rather than the commodity pork products that are most likely to be affected by the disease, Chipotle doesn't believe it has significant exposure to the problem.
Until now, Chipotle has mounted an impressive comeback, with CEO Brian Niccol having reinvigorated the burrito chain's business. Swine fever isn't likely to have any immediate impact on the positive things going on at Chipotle, including moves toward integrating technology, marketing, and new menu offerings into a package that appeals to customers. If BMO is right, then higher costs could eventually eat into the restaurant company's profit growth, and that'd be a tough pill to swallow for Chipotle shareholders. Yet the company itself doesn't expect any significant impact on overall costs from the disease. Investors will get confirmation one way or the other when the burrito giant next reports its quarterly results this summer.



Before you consider Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Editor's note: This story has been updated to include comments received from Chipotle following its initial publication.
One of the best ways to invest for the long term is to focus on reliable stocks with high dividend yields. Combined with a dividend reinvestment plan, these kinds of investments can grow exponentially as you accumulate more shares of a given stock without having to shell out your own cash. Dividend stocks, with the important exception of yield traps, also have a proven track record of returning cash to investors and delivering profits, giving investors an extra degree of security.
If you're looking for great dividend stocks, keep reading to see why these Foolish contributors recommend ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), GlaxoSmithKline (NYSE:GSK), and Target (NYSE:TGT)
IMAGE SOURCE: TARGET.
Todd Campbell (ExxonMobil): If you don't own energy Goliath ExxonMobil yet, now could be the perfect time to add it to your holdings. The company's got some big production coming online over the next few years, and a recent downturn in oil prices has caused shares to swoon and its dividend yield to swell.
A diversified energy company, ExxonMobil explores, produces, refines, and markets oil and gas products. Its vast resources make it one of the world's biggest companies, and its production could begin climbing soon because new production offshore Guyana is expected to come online beginning next year.
Its massive Stabroek field offshore Guyana holds billions of oil equivalent barrels of resources. In fact, ExxonMobil currently anticipates that the play could produce over 750,000 barrels per day by 2025, beginning with 120,000 as early as 2020.
ExxonMobil's also a major player in arguably the most attractive shale formation in the U.S.: the Permian basin. Management thinks it can be producing 1 million barrels of oil equivalent per day in the Permian by 2024.
Certainly, renewables will produce a larger proportion of future energy, but oil and gas will continue to remain major sources of energy for decades. Given that the company produced $20 billion in free cash flow after investments last year and it paid out $14 billion in dividends despite arguably unfavorable market conditions, I think picking it up now when its yield is an attractive 4.6% could be smart.
Sean Williams (GlaxoSmithKline): If you're looking for a top-tier business with a high-yield dividend that you can preferably set and forget in your portfolio, look no further than U.K.-based pharmaceutical and healthcare products provider GlaxoSmithKline.
GlaxoSmithKline has three operating segments, and each brings something to the table that the other doesn't.
The first, Consumer Healthcare, features everything from oral health to nutrition products. Although this is a segment that usually grows at the slowest rate of the three, it generates the most predictable cash flow and offers reasonably strong pricing power. That's because most consumer health products, such as toothpaste, are basic-need goods and will be purchased regardless of how well or poorly the U.S. or global economy are performing.
The second operating segment, vaccines, has historically grown at closer to a mid-single-digit rate. This division is primarily designed to take advantage of a growing global population, which makes it an intriguing long-term play. Recently, though, GlaxoSmithKline has seen vaccine sales soar thanks to Shingrix, the most popular vaccine for the treatment of Shingles. Sales of Shingrix accounted for $457 million in first-quarter sales, or more than a fifth of all vaccines revenue, and it's still growing at an extraordinary pace.
The third and final segment is pharmaceuticals, which generated 54% of first-quarter sales. Although pharmaceuticals is the toughest to predict from a cash flow perspective, it offers the strongest long-term growth rate. Leading the charge are Glaxo's next-generation asthma and COPD medicines (Breo Ellipta, Anoro Ellipta, and Trelegy Ellipta, to name a few), and its portfolio of HIV therapies. In the first quarter alone, these new respiratory products brought in $807 million in sales (more than $3.2 billion on an extrapolated annual basis), while core HIV products hit $1.36 billion in Q1 sales ($5.44 billion in extrapolated annual sales). 
Add this all together, and throw in billions of dollars in established pharmaceutical sales that are still generating a boatload of residual cash flow, and you have a recipe for a 5.8% dividend yield and forward price-to-earnings ratio that's well below the average of the S&P 500. That's what makes GlaxoSmithKline a top high-yield stock to consider buying.
Jeremy Bowman (Target): Fresh off another strong earnings report, Target looks like a great stock to pick up right now. The big-box chain has remade itself and adapted to a new retail era, thriving while department store chains and other traditional retailers are struggling. Target is renovating its stores, is adding new small-format locations, and has launched a multipronged e-commerce strategy, complete with same-day delivery from Shipt and a pickup option that allows customers to get their orders placed into their vehicles once they pull up to the stores.
The results are clear. Comparable sales jumped 4.8% in the first quarter with a 4.3% increase traffic, following a similarly strong performance last year. Digital sales jumped 42%, with the bulk of the growth being driven by same-day fulfillment. 
Operating income increased 9%, and adjusted earnings per share jumped 15% to $1.53, boosted by share buybacks, and easily beat estimates at $1.43. Target declined to raise its full-year guidance, but based on its results and second-quarter EPS forecast of $1.52-$1.72, the company is tracking above the top end of its full-year EPS guidance of $5.75-$6.05.
Based on that range, Target is trading at a forward P/E of just 13, and dividend investors can sit back and collect a 3.3% yield. Even better, the company is a Dividend Aristocrat, and Target is expected to raise its dividend for the 48th year in a row in June. Considering Target's strong recent profit growth, investors could see a sizable dividend increase this time around.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


