Dividend investors generally fall into one of two camps: dividend growth or high yield. This pair of dividend stocks offers up one of each type from companies with decades of annual dividend increases under their belts. One more thing they have in common, however, is that they offer yields at the high end of their historical yield ranges today. That means these Dividend Champions could be presenting a worthwhile buying opportunity right now. Here's a quick primer on each.
ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) is one of the largest players in the global energy industry, with a focus on the oil and natural gas space. Notably, its business spans the upstream (drilling), midstream (pipeline), and downstream (refining and chemicals) sectors. It's worth highlighting that downstream operations tend to benefit from low energy prices. So while the prices of oil and natural gas are the main drivers of the company's top and bottom lines, the diversified portfolio helps to smooth the ups and downs of these often-volatile commodities. This is a deliberate approach that highlights safety.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
But this isn't the only way in which Exxon attempts to keep investors safe. It also has one of the strongest balance sheets in the industry. Long-term debt, for example, makes up less than 10% of the company's capital structure. That's a low level for any company and gives Exxon the financial flexibility to add debt during difficult oil markets while still upping the dividend and supporting its capital spending efforts. In fact, it was one of the few oil majors that was able to do both during the deep oil downturn that started in mid-2014. Its annual dividend streak is up to 37 years at this point.
Right now, Exxon is going against the grain a little, with plans to spend up to $35 billion a year on growth projects despite oil markets that remain volatile. Many peers are taking a more conservative approach. Despite these plans, Exxon has actually been reducing debt, cutting long-term debt by around 30% since hitting a peak in 2016. The best part is that the oil giant's plan, which stretches out to 2025, is starting to show positive results. Meanwhile, investors remain downbeat on the shares, which offer a historically large 5% yield -- a level last seen in the mid-1990s. If high-yield stocks are your thing, then Exxon should be on your short list today.
Next up is consumer staples stock Hormel Foods Corporation (NYSE:HRL), a big player in the packaged food space. That's been a rough industry to be in recently because consumer preferences have shifted toward foods considered healthy and fresh. It's a headwind for Hormel but not something that investors should get too worried about. Yes, the company makes center-of-the-store products like Spam, but it has also been shifting its brand lineup to align with the preferences of its end customers.
For example, it has been selling brands (like Diamond Salt) that don't resonate and buying brands that do (like Wholly Guacamole and Columbus Meats). It has also been focusing on expanding its reach overseas, where it is still just a small player, with a notable business in China and a recent acquisition that gives it a toehold in South America.
There are two things to take away from these changes. First, Hormel is, at its heart, a branded food company that actively manages its portfolio. It has 40 brands that hold the No. 1 or 2 spot in their category. It didn't build this portfolio by chance; decades of hard work have left the company in a position of strength. That strength notably shows up on the balance sheet, where, despite a lot of acquisitions, long-term debt makes up less than 5% of the capital structure. Hormel can handle headwinds and change at the same time.

XOM DIVIDEND YIELD (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS.
Right now, the stock yields around 2%, which is toward the high end of its historical range. That's about what you'd get from an S&P 500 Index fund. What sets Hormel apart is that it has grown its dividend at an incredible 15% annualized rate over the past decade. To put some numbers on that stat, Hormel's dividend was $0.19 per share in 2009 and $0.75 per share in 2018. Note, too, that it has increased its dividend annually for more than 50 years, so it clearly puts a high value on rewarding investors with steady and growing dividends.
And as you might expect based on management's conservative use of debt, the payout ratio is modest at around 50% of earnings. That provides ample room for growth and downside protection should Hormel hit a soft patch. If you like dividend growth, Hormel is worth a close look.
It would be overkill to suggest that Exxon and Hormel are perfect dividend stocks. No stock is perfect. But the mixture of historically high yields and safety that these two companies offer should be hugely compelling for income investors of any risk preference. If you haven't already added these stocks to your high-yield or dividend-growth portfolio, respectively, now is a good time to consider them.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Risk is just part of the game on Wall Street -- there's no way around it. How much risk you take on, however, is up to you, and the stocks you pick for your portfolio play a big role. If you are a low-risk investor, then you'll want to favor financially strong companies with long histories of success. Add some dividend income to the mix, too, and sticking it out through thick and thin gets a lot easier. Here are three great stocks that fit that bill.
ExxonMobil's (NYSE:XOM) balance sheet is among the strongest of its oil major peers, with long-term debt at less than 10% of the capital structure. With a market cap of $280 billion, it is one of the largest energy companies in the world. Its business, meanwhile, is spread across the upstream (drilling), midstream (pipeline), and downstream (chemicals and refining) sectors, providing balance to its portfolio. Exxon is a conservatively run company and there is a lot to like here. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
Today the yield is a generous 5% or so, toward the high end of the company's historical yield range. That's because investors are worried about Exxon's future today. Production has been falling for a number of years and the oil giant is in the middle of a big spending binge, with annual capital spending plans of up to $35 billion through 2025.
Those investments are starting to pay off and production appears to have turned a corner. Yet there's a lingering fear that carbon energy sources are on the way out. That's probably true over the long term, but oil and natural gas are depleting assets, so you need to keep drilling or you run out. And even if the world comes together on carbon reduction plans, lots more oil will still be needed. 
The fly in the ointment here is that oil prices are volatile, which is one of the reasons why Exxon's yield is so high today. But the company has proven over time that its conservative approach can weather the ups and downs while it continues to invest for the future and reward investors with dividends (it has increased its dividend annually for 37 years). If you like sleeping well at night, this energy giant can help you out. 
Next up is Hormel Foods (NYSE:HRL), which is probably best known for making Spam. That iconic canned meat can be found in the center of the grocery store, which is a problem today because customers are increasingly favoring fresher foods, which tend to be located on the outer rim of the supermarket. That's put pressure on the entire packaged food industry and helps explain why Hormel's yield, at around 2%, is toward the high end of its historical range. But this food maker is adjusting -- just like it has many times before.
For example, it has been buying brands like Wholly Guacamole and Columbus Meats that resonate with customers while selling older brands (Diamond Salt is one example) that don't. This is just par for the course at Hormel, which is best viewed as a brand manager. Today the company has a portfolio of roughly 40 brands that hold the No. 1 or 2 position in their niche. A focus on leading brands is how it has amassed an over 50-year streak of annual dividend increases. And before saying the yield is too low, consider that the dividend has grown at an annualized rate of 15% over the past decade. That's pretty incredible. 
The best part, however, for conservative investors, is that Hormel is very prudent with its balance sheet. Despite making a number of notable acquisitions over the past few years, long-term debt makes up less than 5% of the capital structure. There's very little financial risk here. While it would be hard to call the stock cheap today, great companies rarely go on sale. Hormel is a wonderful option for most investors, and the historically high yield is a nice sweetener today.  
The last name to consider is Procter & Gamble (NYSE:PG), an icon in the consumer goods space that makes things like Bounty paper towels and Tide laundry detergent. These are items that consumers use every day and brands that they tend to be fairly loyal to even during economic downturns. The company has amassed an incredible record of 63 consecutive annual dividend increases off this foundation.   

PG DIVIDEND YIELD (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS.
Debt here is a bit higher than the other two companies discussed so far, making up roughly 30% of the capital structure. That sounds high relative to Exxon and Hormel, but is still a conservative number overall. It's also worth noting that Procter & Gamble, like Hormel, is a brand manager at heart. It recently sold a number of brands so it could refocus on its core offerings -- a move that has worked out very well for the company and its investors.   
That success, however, is a slight problem. Procter & Gamble is a great company, but it looks a little pricey today. The stock has rallied nearly 45% over the past year and looks expensive based on key metrics like price to sales, price to earnings, price to cash flow, and price to book value. The yield, at roughly 2.5%, is also not that impressive compared to the historical yield range. However, Procter & Gamble is a well-run company built on a conservative core business.  
There are a number of factors that link these three companies. Two big ones are that they take a conservative stance with their finances and make sure to reward investors via regular dividend increases. Those are traits that will help conservative investors stick around through thick and thin. It's not that you can simply forget you own Exxon, Hormel, or Procter & Gamble, but you don't need to keep watching the ticker tape concerned that they might go out of business during the next recession.



Before you consider The Procter & Gamble Company, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and The Procter & Gamble Company wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


