The Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI) was down 0.07% at 1:55 p.m. EST Thursday as trade deal negotiations and the impeachment inquiry in the House of Representatives generated plenty of noise.
Shares of Intel (NASDAQ:INTC) managed a small gain despite the company's admission that it has yet to solve its supply problems. And ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) was up strongly following a report of an acceleration of asset sales.
A long delay getting its 10nm manufacturing process ready for volume production has created some serious problems for Intel. Partly because of the push-out of the 10nm process, Intel has been unable to supply enough chips to meet demand. Prioritizing higher-end PC and data center chips has led to shortages in the low-end PC market.
This situation has been going on since last year, and the company confirmed in an open letter to its customers on Wednesday that it's still a problem. The company apologized to its customers in the letter for recent PC CPU shipment delays, and it said that supply remains tight, because market growth has outpaced its efforts to ramp up production.
IMAGE SOURCE: INTEL.
Intel is increasing investment in 14nm capacity to reduce the impact of these shortages, and it's successfully boosted its PC CPU supply by a double-digit percentage in the second half of this year. But that hasn't been enough to satisfy the market for its chips.
This prolonged shortage gives rival Advanced Micro Devices (NASDAQ:AMD) an opportunity to steal more market share away from Intel. AMD launched its third-generation Ryzen PC CPUs in July, built on a 7nm process from a third-party foundry. In the desktop PC CPU market, AMD has gained 5 percentage points of market share from Intel over the past year.
Intel will eventually solve its supply issues. But until it does, the company is handing AMD market share on a silver platter. Intel stock was up 0.2% despite the news.
Oil major ExxonMobil was already planning to divest $15 billion of assets by 2021. The company is aiming to dispose of less-desirable noncore assets, using the proceeds to invest in projects that offer higher returns on investment. Exxon announced a deal to sell $4.5 billion of Norwegian assets in September as part of this plan.
Reuters reported on Thursday that Exxon has accelerated its asset sale program. The company now reportedly plans to divest up to $25 billion of assets in Europe, Asia, and Africa. The plan includes:
Shares of Exxon are essentially flat this year. The stock was up 1.9% on the asset sale news.



Before you consider Intel Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Intel Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Canadian oil driller Vermillion Energy (NYSE:VET) has a massive 14% dividend yield. That's around seven times the yield on offer from an S&P 500 Index fund. That certainly sounds great, but there's a lot more for investors to understand before they jump aboard this relatively tiny energy stock. 
Vermillion Energy hails from Canada and has a $2.3 billion market cap. While not exactly a small company, it competes against names like ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and Chevron (NYSE:CVX), which have market caps of roughly $290 billion and $230 billion, respectively. Normally you wouldn't even compare Vermillion to names like these (it doesn't have downstream assets like the integrated giants, for one thing), but its drilling-focused business is actually spread around the world -- just like those of the energy majors. Roughly two-thirds of Vermillion's production comes from Canada and the United States, with the rest coming from Europe and Australia. Europe and Australia provide about half of its free cash flow, though, so it is definitely not a regional player.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
Since 2012 Vermillion has seen material growth in its production via a mixture of acquisitions and capital investmentm and its 13% annualized production growth rate over that span would put most of the integrated energy majors to shame. That said, 2020 is expected to see roughly flat production based on the company's current projections. A part of that is thanks to a plan to reduce capital spending by nearly 15% in 2020. That is in line with the company's larger goal to self-fund most of its own growth.
Self-funding is an increasingly important approach in today's energy markets, with drillers looking to live within their means. That's tough with often volatile oil prices hovering in the $50- and $60-per-barrel range, which doesn't leave much room for profits. However, it's important to highlight that Vermillion isn't a fracking company focused on U.S. unconventional onshore assets where cost containment is a huge issue. Vermillion tends to favor conventional drilling, with assets that benefit from long production lives and relatively low costs. Vermillion does have a solid foundation in this regard, even if it plans to pull back some on the capital spending front.
And then there's the dividend, which has trended higher over the past 16 years. This period included the company changing its corporate structure from a Canadian Royalty Trust to a regular corporation. Many other companies that made the same transition ended up cutting their dividends. That said, Vermillion's dividend often hits multi-year plateaus, so the growth isn't steady or predictable. The dividend, however, is paid monthly, which makes it kind of like replacing a paycheck.
So what's the problem? For starters, Vermillion is spending more than it brings in the door, and has been for many years. Since 2009 the company's capital expenditures and dividend have exceeded its funds from operations (FFO). To make up the difference, the oil company has issued a lot of shares (the average share count has nearly doubled over the past decade) and debt (up 630% over the past 10 years). Since stock price and yield have an inverse relationship, it shouldn't come as a surprise that the company's 13% yield is backed by a stock that is off by more than 50% since roughly 2010. That high yield, meanwhile, makes selling more shares today an expensive way to raise capital.

VET DATA BY YCHARTS
While the low yields in the debt market are a far better option for raising cash, the material increase in Vermillion's debt is also a problem. The company's debt to equity ratio is 0.77 times, which doesn't sound so bad until you compare it to Exxon's 0.25 times and Chevron's 0.21 times. Vermillion's ability to pay interest expenses is problem. The Canadian oil company's times interest earned ratio is around 7.25. Again, that sounds OK until you compare it to Chevron's 24 times and Exxon's 26 times. Vermillion does not have the same balance sheet strength as its larger peers, which are basically built to weather the volatile ups and downs of the energy market.
All in all, if you are looking for a financially strong oil driller with a dividend that looks secure, Vermillion isn't it. Another leg down in oil prices could severely pinch this oil driller's ability to return cash to shareholders while still investing in its business. That's a key reason why investors have pushed the stock price lower and yield higher. Although the company has made a commitment to support its dividend (and lived up to it over the years), a dividend cut wouldn't exactly be a surprise. And, for that reason, it's hard to call Vermillion a great dividend stock.
Dividend investors tend to be a conservative group, preferring a reliable dividend to one that's large and at risk of being cut (often called a sucker's yield). While Vermillion has certainly proven that it is willing to support its dividend even while spending heavily on growth, there comes a point where too many debt and equity sales catch up to a company. Add in the fact that Vermillion sells a highly volatile commodity that's been languishing at relatively weak prices, and it's pretty clear why investors are worried here. That concern has left the yield at lofty levels, but most dividend investors should probably avoid Vermillion.
This is high-risk fare that needs close monitoring, which is fine if that's what you want to own. But it definitely isn't a great dividend stock.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


In late October, energy giants ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and BP (NYSE:BP) delivered their third-quarter 2019 earnings reports, which looked pretty bad compared to the year-ago quarter. For Exxon, earnings per share declined nearly 50% from $1.46 to $0.75. BP's result wasn't much better, with EPS declining 42% from $0.192 to $0.11.
Like other integrated oil and gas companies, ExxonMobil and BP are coming to terms with the new reality of $50 to $70 oil. Unlike in past cycles, oil prices are likely to remain somewhat low as a result of the U.S. shale revolution, which has sparked a supply increase more than capable of keeping up with global demand.  ExxonMobil and BP are similar in some respects, but one has superior upside for 2020 and beyond.
Over 80% of Exxon's Q3 2019 revenue came from its downstream (refining) business, yet upstream (exploration, drilling, completions, and production) made up nearly 70% of earnings. That's because Exxon's upstream business has higher margins than its downstream business, which historically has razor-thin margins.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Despite the low margins, downstream is one of Exxon's main competitive advantages, so it's no surprise that the company is positioning itself for a favorable future after "IMO 2020" goes into effect Jan.1. IMO 2020 is the unofficial name given to the International Maritime Organization's long-anticipated regulatory reduction in sulfur emissions. IMO 2020 is a big deal for shippers, commodity traders, refiners, and investors because it opens new markets for alternative bunker fuel sources. Clean-burning distillates, such as diesel, will be combined with high-sulfur fuel oil (used in commercial ships) to produce low or very low sulfur emitting fuels.
Exxon has the second-largest refining capacity in the world and the largest coking capacity of any supermajor. Coker units thermally crack the long hydrocarbon chains embedded in the residual oil of a distillation column and turn it into usable products like light and heavy gas oils and naphtha. Exxon's heavy investment in the Permian Basin , the largest U.S. shale play, has contributed to the current performance and projected growth of Exxon's upstream business, but the benefits extend to the company's downstream business as well. That's because Permian Basin crude is light and sweet, meaning it needs less refining to produce valuable ultra-low sulfur diesel.
In response to a question on IMO 2020 during an August quarterly conference call, Senior Vice President Neil A. Chapman said:
I think if you have low conversion refineries, you'll be incented to run -- to reduce sulfur by running sweet crudes. Our [refineries, particularly] on the Gulf Coast are high-conversion refineries with low fuel oil production. And so, we would say that we feel very well positioned in the U.S. We have high-conversion refineries. We added this big new coker in Antwerp. And we're investing in projects that reduce high sulfur fuel oil production in Singapore.
Exxon's growth in light sweet crude oil from its upstream business pairs nicely with a downstream market that will demand lower-sulfur solutions for the shipping industry. "We've been planning for this for a long, long time," said Chapman. "The market will do what the market will do. ... but directionally we feel like ... we sit in a very strong and [advantaged] position."
According to BP CFO Brian Gilvary, BP got "back into balance at $50 a barrel about two and a half years ago." The company's strategy is straightforward: be able to breakeven when oil is $50 a barrel or lower and then use the surplus cash to pay down debt, buy back shares, and pay the company's dividend. But the vast majority of BP's earnings, like Exxon's, come from the company's upstream portfolio, where earnings have declined by nearly 50% since the third quarter of 2018.
 One reason for this decline is BP's reliance on offshore investment and lack of exposure to the U.S. shale revolution. Despite having a consistent downstream portfolio and "good downstream result[s] supported by oil trading"for the third quarter of 2019, as Gilvary said in the CNBC interview, BP has been unable to replace the gaping hole in earnings that upstream used to provide, raising the question of if its dividend is sustainable.
Before the recent quarter, BP's trailing-12-month payout ratio, which is the percentage of earnings that goes toward paying a dividend, was over 90%. After this quarter, its trailing-12-month payout ratio is now 175%, meaning BP's dividend is quickly outpacing its earnings.
Although BP was able to stabilize debt in Q3, keeping it flat quarter over quarter, it's hard for the company to pay down debt, let alone take on more, when its dividend is outpacing earnings. ExxonMobil finds itself in a similar problematic position, with a trailing-12-month payout ratio that was about 80% before Q3 earnings but now sits close to 100%.   
Pressure on integrated oil company earnings is straining dividends across the board. That said, ExxonMobil and BP both posted impressive Q3 cash flow from operations well in excess of capital expenditures, showing that their underlying businesses are strong. That said, free cash flow was less than the dividend payment for ExxonMobil and close to, but above the dividend payment for BP. With Exxon providing inadequate free cash flow to cover its dividend and BP cutting it close, it remains unclear whether operating cash flow will be good enough to keep up with future dividend payments.



There's no hiding the fact that ExxonMobil and BP are still adjusting to the current low-oil-price environment. That being said, Exxon's onshore upstream portfolio pairs nicely with its downstream portfolio to position the company well for 2020. Investors should consider waiting to see just how much Exxon will benefit as IMO 2020 goes into effect. As for BP, the company is trying to position itself to deal with $50 oil, which is already a challenge, while simultaneously buying back shares and paying a large dividend. In essence, BP is making a lot of promises at once, all of which require money. BP could end up straining itself as it tries to balance rewarding shareholders while also growing the business.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


