Investing in ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) has always been for more patient investors as it generates value for shareholders through the ups and downs of the oil business. Being a stock for patient investors means that patience is going to be tested from time to time, and whoo boy, is this one of those times. Even though earnings are on the upswing, they are nowhere near as appetizing as some other companies' recent results.
Let's take a look at ExxonMobil's most recent results, why they seem so weak comparatively, and what an investor should do faced with what could be a string of disappointing earnings in the near future. 
DATA SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL EARNINGS RELEASE. EPS= EARNINGS PER SHARE.
Even as someone who is quick to defend ExxonMobil, I have to admit that these results are curiously weak. In a vacuum, a net income increase of 16% year over year sounds fine, but when you consider how much oil prices have increased over the past six months and some of the results its peers have cranked out this past quarter, these numbers don't pack much of a punch. 
Looking at the company's results, the thing that stands out the most is its upstream production business. Sure, downstream and chemicals both saw earnings decline compared to this time last year, but that is how those two business segments are supposed to operate (higher oil prices means higher feedstock costs and lower margins). While upstream benefited immensely from the run-up in prices, production continues to decline such that Exxon isn't realizing the benefits of these prices as much as its peers.
DATA SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL EARNINGS RELEASE. CHART BY AUTHOR. *ADJUSTED TO EXCLUDE THE IMPACT OF U.S. TAX CHANGES AND ASSET IMPAIRMENTS IN Q4 2017.
A decent portion of that production decline was a result of an earthquake that shut down operations at its LNG liquefaction facility in Papua New Guinea, which knocked out 25,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day. However, it's pretty apparent from these results that its current slate of new projects coming on line and its growth in shale isn't enough to offset the decline of mature assets and some of its small divestments. 
IMAGE SOURCE GETTY IMAGES.
The one message that ExxonMobil's management has been communicating lately is patience. In its most recent analyst meeting, it highlighted a slew of projects to grow production and generate loads of cash to reward shareholders. Exxon's VP of investor relations, Jeff Woodbury, reiterated that point while also explaining the less-than-great upstream results during the company's conference call:
In Upstream, we benefited from higher realizations for both liquids and natural gas. However, our liquids realizations rose less in the benchmark prices due to widening of the Canadian heavy oil discount. These higher prices resulted in lower volume entitlements. Production was also reduced by downtime in the quarter and divestment of assets.
We're continuing to progress growth initiatives as outlined in our Analyst Meeting, including increased drilling in the Permian, advancing attractive new projects, and completing maintenance activities to enhance performance of our existing assets.
Finally, we're actively strengthening our portfolio through the acquisition of new assets, such as exploration acreage offshore Brazil. 
(You can check out a transcript of the whole conference call here). 

XOM data by YCharts
As a stock, ExxonMobil is incredibly polarizing. On the one hand, its recent earnings results have left a lot to be desired when compared to its peers. On the other, it has a seven-year growth plan that might make your mouth water. The trouble is that the real needle-moving projects in that plan won't go live until 2020 or later.
That leaves investors in a bit of a quandary. Should you buy into ExxonMobil now while it's cheap, wait for a post-2020 payout, and run up a sizable aspiring bill from banging your head on the table after every earnings report; or put money into a better-performing big oil player today and check out Exxon at a later date? I think the answer lies somewhere in the middle. For those already invested, it's worth hanging on and letting the forehead bruises accumulate, but if you have some cash burning a hole in your pocket, it may be best to look at adding some of Exxon's peers to your portfolio.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Oil has been simultaneously one of the more interesting and challenging sectors to invest in over the past few years. The effects of the oil price slump that persisted from 2014 through 2016 continue to ripple across the sector, and they've led many investors to shun the industry. Yet while crude oil prices are on the rise, many companies still trade for rather attractive valuations.
So we asked three of our investing contributors to highlight an oil industry stock they think is worth a second look today. Here's why they picked Hi-Crush Partners (OTC:HCRS.Q), Kinder Morgan (NYSE:KMI), and ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM).  
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Tyler Crowe (Hi-Crush Partners): When the shale oil boom was getting started five years ago, it seemed like Wall Street couldn't throw money at frack sand suppliers fast enough. Shale was the "it" thing, and high projected demand for sand meant suppliers were spending wildly add to capacity. When the oil crash hit, though, sand demand dried up quickly as producers became less eager to drill new wells, which led to a lot of excess capacity, weak margins, and overleveraged balance sheets. 
Hi-Crush Partners was one of the hardest hit. Its debt load ballooned to unsustainable levels, and management was forced to cut its payout and issue new shares at incredibly low valuations to meet its cash needs. Based on that recent history, I can understand why some investors might shy away from its stock.
If you are willing to put the past behind you, however, you'll see that  the company actually looks attractive right now. Demand for frack sand is on the rise, and Hi-Crush's mines are running at high utilization rates. It has expanded operations in the red-hot Permian Basin, and its last-mile logistics offerings are improving its margins on every ton sold. All of these elements have allowed it to significantly repair its balance sheet; the company has returned to paying a sizable distribution, and is even starting to buy back shares to reverse the dilution it resorted to previously.
The oil price crash compelled both producers and companies serving the industry to become more prudent about capital allocation and financial management. It appears that Hi-Crush's management is taking the hard lessons it learned during that slump into this boom cycle. There is always a chance that sand prices could swing wildly in response to shifts in oil and gas demand, but it appears that if they do, Hi-Crush will be in a better position to handle it. 
Travis Hoium (Kinder Morgan): Kinder Morgan is one of the leading pipeline companies in the United States, transporting more petroleum products than any other independent operator, and moving 40% of the natural gas consumed domestically. What I like about Kinder Morgan is that it's less dependent on oil and natural gas prices than most companies in the sector. Its business is focused on fee-based transportation, with 66% of 2018 EBDA (earnings before depreciation and amortization) expected to come from take-or-pay contracts. 
In 2018, management expects the business to generate adjusted EBITDA of $7.49 billion, with distributable cash flow of $2.05 per share. Given that its current dividend is $0.80 per share, that suggests it will have ample room to grow its payouts over the long term. Management expects to generate excess cash flow of $568 million in 2018 alone, which could be used to pay down debt or fund growth. 
Kinder Morgan's enterprise value of $72.4 billion is 9.7 times expected 2018 EBITDA, which I think is a reasonable price for a company well positioned to take advantage of long-term growth in oil and natural gas consumption in the United States. From a dividend perspective, the stock yields 4.9% at the current price, which is a strong yield for investors bullish on the sector, and based on management's projections, they will have plenty of opportunity to boost the dividend in the future. 
Reuben Gregg Brewer (ExxonMobil): ExxonMobil is one of the world's largest integrated oil companies, with a portfolio diversified across the entire oil and natural gas value chain. Its peers' stock prices rose over the last year as higher oil prices boosted their financial results. ExxonMobil's stock price, however, has fallen. 

XOM DATA BY YCHARTS
There are some valid reasons for this, among them that ExxonMobil's peers caught up to its usually industry-leading return on capital employed numbers, and that the energy giant's production fell in recent years. However, these are likely to be temporary issues: It recently presented plans to boost its return metric from the single digits to the mid-teens, and it's working on key production-boosting projects onshore in the United States, as well as offshore from Mozambique and Guyana. The problem is that Exxon is a giant ship that takes time to turn.   
But that's also why there's opportunity here for investors who think long term. Short-term concerns have pushed ExxonMobil's price-to-tangible-book-value ratio to low levels not seen since the 1980s. Its yield, meanwhile, is around 3.9%, at the high end of its historical range. But Exxon remains one of the most conservatively run oil majors with an incredibly strong balance sheet (long-term debt, for example, only makes up 12% of the capital structure). If you don't act soon, you could miss the chance to collect a big yield while you wait for management to complete its plans.  



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


We have fossil fuels today because a bunch of algae and other biomass sank to the bottom of dinosaur-laden swamps tens of millions of years ago, where it was compressed over time into its current form. Or something like that.
Crude oil, natural gas, and coal dominate the energy landscape of the modern world, and nowhere is that dominance more absolute than the transportation sector, which is almost entirely dependent on liquid petroleum fuels. While it looks increasingly likely that electric vehicles will grab significant market share in the coming decades, liquid fuels won't be coughing up the entire market anytime soon. That fact has encouraged many companies to pursue novel renewable fuels, with relatively little to show for it in terms of commercialized technologies.
While ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) is well aware of this recent history, it has maintained a long-term focus on one of biotech's holy grails: limitless volumes of drop-in algae fuels. Exxon has the money. It has technical prowess. It has time. Can the oil supermajor successfully use synthetic biology tools to commercialize algae fuels?
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
ExxonMobil's ultimate goal is to commercialize a genetically engineered algae strain capable of producing economically viable renewable fuels and chemicals in large outdoor facilities. And it's taking practical steps to get there.
For one thing, it partnered with cutting-edge synthetic biology company Synthetic Genomics (SGI). SGI has a number of groundbreaking accomplishments under its belt. It created the first synthetic organism (descended from a computer program), discovered the minimal viable genome needed to boot up life (31% of the genes have unknown functions), and is even building a device that could synthesize microbes found on Mars from a transmitted radio signal (among other uses).
Put another way, SGI isn't some wishy washy start-up high on hype and low on execution. Instead, it's exactly what ExxonMobil needs, especially given the daunting hurdles on the horizon.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
That technical expertise has already paid dividends. In 2017 ExxonMobil and SGI announced they had discovered a way to make their algae strain twice as efficient at producing oil without affecting growth rates -- the best of both worlds, as past efforts to increase oil production has resulted in slower-growing organisms.
But as a reminder of the difficulty of predictably controlling biology, the breakthrough is still just a starting point. ExxonMobil and SGI remain a long way from a commercial-scale facility, although shareholders now have a date to circle on the calendar for the next step toward that goal: 2025.
That's when ExxonMobil and SGI believe they could have the "technical ability" to create a facility with 10,000 barrels per day of next-generation algae fuel. That works out to about 130 million gallons per year, which is equivalent to a large corn ethanol facility. Building an algal fuel facility is much more complex, though. Unlike ethanol that is produced under ideal conditions in sealed stainless steel tanks, the algae production process being developed will utilize open-air facilities that need to fight off contamination and a host of other concerns that remain unchartered territory for industrial algal cultivation.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Long story short, developing the "technical ability" to create economically viable algae fuels is not the same thing as actually producing economically viable algae fuels. The first commercial scale facility is still over 10 years away -- and that's in the best case scenario.But the payoff for success would be almost unimaginable.
Let's assume that ExxonMobil and SGI can produce 10,000 gallons of fuel per acre per year, which is what a few other algae companies have targeted in the past. That works out to about 6.4 million gallons per square mile per year. At that level of production the technology could technically provide all 250 billion gallons of motor gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel consumed in the United States with about 40,000 square miles of production.
It sounds like a lot of land -- and it is -- but it's about perspective. The most important crude oil patch in the world right now, the Permian Basin, sprawls across 75,000 square miles in West Texas and eastern New Mexico. By 2021 the shale formation could churn out over 5 million barrels of oil per day, which would be equivalent to about 30% of total American transportation fuels consumption.
Microscopic photosynthetic factories won't be competing with the Permian Basin any time soon (and maybe not ever), but the potential goes to show why ExxonMobil is investing in biotechnology with an ultra-long mindset. After all, the company has a robust portfolio of refining infrastructure that it could use to process crude algae biomass into renewable fuels and chemicals. Swinging for the fences with outdoor algae cultivation sounds a lot better than potentially having to write-off a significant part of its refining asset base if future governments penalize carbon intensive petroleum-based products.
THE TEXAS DESERT IS FULL OF OIL. ONE DAY IT MIGHT COME FROM ALGAE. IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
It's not surprising that ExxonMobil (along with some of its supermajor peers) is pouring capital into next-generation renewable fuels development. The first technology to prove economically viable could forever change the future of energy for the entire planet. Of course, we're all still waiting for that first success after innumerable failures.
It might seem a little counterintuitive, but ExxonMobil is in the exact right position to deliver just such an outcome. It has ample cash flow to divert to unproven industrial biotech processes for as many years as it takes to prove successful, so long as progress is made along the way. It's also partnered with a leading company in the field.
So, from a long-term perspective, it's encouraging that ExxonMobil is slowly making progress toward its goal of commercializing algae fuels. But it's also important to remember that the partnership with SGI is still in the early stages of development, and that major technical hurdles remain. That said, the ongoing project is as good a bet as any on algae fuels, but you might be waiting until the 2030s before the outcome is determined.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


