It's time for a clash of the titans -- the oil industry titans, that is. 
Let's look at the stock market's largest oil company, ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), and America's largest independent oil and gas exploration and production company, ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP), to see which one looks like a better buy right now. 
EXXONMOBIL AND CONOCOPHILLIPS ARE BOTH TOP OIL INDUSTRY COMPANIES. BUT EXXON HAS A DOWNSTREAM OPERATION THAT CONOCO LACKS. IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Oil and gas industry performance has suffered across the board since oil prices began their slump in 2014. And with no rebound in the forecast, companies have had to adjust their operations to cope with the "new normal." 
ConocoPhillips has been coping by cutting costs and refocusing its efforts on higher-margin projects. Last quarter, it made some significant moves in this area by selling off its stake in several of its Canadian oil-sands assets to its former partner, Cenovus Energy. It also unloaded low-margin projects in the San Juan Basin. And although the company isn't yet profitable under current conditions, it is generating plenty of cash.
ExxonMobil is also making gobs of cash, and unlike Conoco, it hasn't had to sell any of its assets. The reason is Exxon's robust downstream operations, which have been offsetting the company's losses on the production side. Indeed, in Q1, Exxon's production division still posted a loss, albeit a tiny one. But its overall profitability is enough to win in this category.
Winner: ExxonMobil.
By now, oil and gas investors are well aware of the risks of investing in this industry, especially if they bought in before 2014. The silver lining to malaise afflicting the energy sector is that many oil and gas stocks -- including Exxon and Conoco -- pay a dividend, which can help to tide investors over until the storm has passed. 
Unfortunately for investors, many of those dividends have been slashed over the past few years as companies shore up their balance sheets to weather the prolonged storm. In 2015, for example, ConocoPhillips cut its quarterly dividend from $0.74 per share to $0.25. For 2017, it increased the payout to $0.265, but it's still a far cry from where it was. However, given how far the company's share price has fallen -- from over $86 in 2014 to under $45 today -- that still amounts to a 2.36% yield. Not fantastic, but best in class among oil and gas exploration and production companies. 
ExxonMobil, on the other hand, is one of the few oil companies that hasn't cut its dividend (my favorite oil stock, Apache, is another). In fact, Exxon has steadily raised its quarterly dividend, from $0.69 a share in 2014 to $0.77 today, for a 3.8% yield. In fact, along with Chevron, Exxon is the only so-called "dividend aristocrat" -- a company that has raised its dividend annually for more than 25 consecutive years -- among oil companies today. It's not likely to risk that designation by cutting or freezing its dividend. 
Although Conoco's management probably did the right thing by cutting the dividend, a yield is a yield, and currently, Exxon's is much higher. Plus, Exxon's is likely to continue to grow as the company maintains its dividend aristocrat status.
Winner: ExxonMobil.
Past performance and current dividend yield, though, tell only half the story of a company. Investors should be much more concerned with where a company's going. And ConocoPhillips and ExxonMobil have both been clear about their plans moving forward.
Conoco announced its strategy in November. Its plan is to jettison less-profitable assets and use the proceeds to reduce its debt and reward shareholders through dividends and buybacks rather than spending the cash to boost production growth. The asset sales in Q1 represented a huge step forward in executing this strategy, allowing Conoco to reach its debt target of $20 billion by the end of 2017. It also allowed the company to increase its stock-buyback authorization from $3 billion to $6 billion.Make no mistake: This is a very shareholder-friendly strategy.
ExxonMobil, on the other hand, is staying the course. The company is continuing its operations and reporting some successes, such as a major oil sandstone discovery in Guyana. It's also expanding, buying a 25% stake in a Mozambique gas field and announcing an expansion of a Singapore petrochemical plant. For all this activity, though, the company's production remains flat and unprofitable. With no apparent changes in the works, it's unclear when this strategy will pay off for investors.
Winner: ConocoPhillips.
Right now, thanks to its superior internal returns and a higher dividend, ExxonMobil looks like the better buy. That said, you should still keep an eye on ConocoPhillips to see whether its shareholder-friendly strategy can pay off and return it to profitability. Exxon shareholders should also be keeping an eye on the company's production numbers, and if they don't start getting better soon, it may be time to look for better performance elsewhere.


Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


With the stock market hovering near all-time highs, it can be a smart idea to think a little defensively in your portfolio. However, that doesn't mean you need to give up your growth potential if the market keeps rising. Blue chip dividend stocks have historically performed better than their non-dividend counterparts during tough times, and many have outperformed the overall market over long time periods.
With that in mind, here are five of the largest dividend payers in the market, all of which pay out more than $5 billion per year to shareholders and could make excellent additions to your portfolio now.
Company
Recent Stock Price
Dividend Yield
Annual Dividends Paid
ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM)
$81.55
3.8%
$12.9 billion
AT&T (NYSE:T)
$38.12
5.1%
$12.0 billion
Wells Fargo (NYSE:WFC)
$52.41
2.9%
$7.6 billion
Procter & Gamble (NYSE:PG)
$87.25
3.2%
$7.2 billion
International Business Machines (NYSE:IBM)
$152.49
3.9%
$5.6 billion
DATA SOURCE: CNBC AND AUTHOR'S CALCULATIONS. STOCK PRICES, DIVIDEND YIELDS, AND ANNUALIZED DIVIDEND RATES ARE CURRENT AS OF MAY 29, 2017. ANNUAL DIVIDENDS PAID ARE CALCULATED BY MULTIPLYING THE CURRENT QUARTERLY DIVIDEND RATE BY FOUR, AND THEN MULTIPLYING BY THE NUMBER OF OUTSTANDING SHARES.
Integrated oil giant ExxonMobil is one of the largest companies in the world, so it should be no surprise that it's also one of the biggest dividend payers.
One major reason to like Exxon is for the diversification of its business. The company has operations in offshore and onshore oil drilling, chemicals, refining, and more. And while much of Exxon's revenue suffers when oil prices fall, some areas of the business actually tend to do better. For example, as my Foolish colleague Reuben Gregg Brewer pointed out, 2015 was a terrible year for Exxon's drilling operations, but the company's refining business more than doubled its profits.
As far as the dividend goes, Exxon is a member of the Dividend Aristocrats index, having raised its dividend for 34 consecutive years, and pays 3.8% as of this writing. Considering the company's financial strength and profitability, the streak shouldn't be in jeopardy anytime soon.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Telecom giant AT&T is a favorite stock among dividend-seeking investors, and for good reason -- its 5.1% yield is among the best you'll find from such a stable company. And like Exxon, AT&T has a streak of consecutive dividend increases that exceeds three decades.
There are a few good reasons to like AT&T over the long term. For one thing, AT&T has a pending acquisition of Time Warner. That will add all of the latter's content, helping AT&T to keep building a moat around its business, and allowing it to continue to bundle more and more services together -- potentially capturing market share from rivals such as Verizon and Sprint.
Wells Fargo has significantly underperformed the rest of the banking sector over the past nine months or so, as a result of the now-infamous "fake accounts" scandal.
This was certainly a major misstep by the bank, and the fallout from the scandal is obvious. The bank's non-interest income has fallen significantly, expenses are up, and the bank's normally strong efficiency ratio has suffered.
Having said that, I believe that the effects of the scandal will be temporary. Wells Fargo remains one of the most well-run banks in the world, in terms of risk management, efficiency of operations, and profitability. The bank has consistently delivered better returns on equity and assets than its rivals, while maintaining a relatively low-risk asset portfolio.
Consumer product giant Procter & Gamble's strength lies in its vast portfolio of well-known brand names, including Gillette, Pampers, Tide, and Downy, just to name a few. To be clear, there certainly are some challenges facing Procter & Gamble going forward. For example, discounted and subscription-based razor competitors such as Dollar Shave Club have cost the Gillette brand market share in recent years.
However, the long-term outlook is still strong for P&G shareholders. The company has proactively shed non-core brands to focus on its biggest winners, and has done an excellent job of controlling costs and boosting margins. Finally, Procter & Gamble has one of the longest streaks of consecutive dividend increases in the market at 60 years and counting.
It was recently disclosed that Warren Buffett had unloaded about 30% of Berkshire Hathaway's massive stake in International Business Machines, better known as IBM. Buffett said that the company was facing strong competition, and therefore he had valued its stock "somewhat downward." However, don't be too quick to abandon IBM -- Buffett still owns more than 50 million shares of the tech giant, and the central reasons Buffett bought IBM in the first place still apply.
For one thing, IBM still has great relationships with large organizations, which not only provide stability to its revenue, but also give the company a strong base on which to grow with new product developments. The business also has "stickiness," meaning that it would cost its customers a lot of money to choose a new provider for the integrated solutions (hardware, software, and services) that IBM provides.



Before you consider International Business Machines Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and International Business Machines Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


