Although we don't believe in timing the market or panicking over daily movements, we do like to keep an eye on market changes -- just in case they're material to our investing thesis.
Happy holidays! Stocks hit record highs today as the most valuable U.S. company, Apple, gained 3.8% on the announcement that it has finally inked a deal with China Mobile. The S&P 500 and the narrower Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI) both rose 0.5%. With the major indexes at all-time highs (the Russell 2000 index of small-capitalization stocks is, too), many observers are warning that stocks are beginning to look expensive, but that's not the case for all Dow components. Three of the four cheapest, ranked by ascending order of forward price-to-earnings multiples are IBM (NYSE:IBM), Chevron (NYSE:CVX) and Cisco Systems (NASDAQ:CSCO).
(In case you're wondering, the absolute cheapest is JPMorgan Chase, but I've decided not to profile it here because it has already received so much attention this year.)
Shares of IBM tracked the S&P 500 through the first quarter, but they then ran out of steam even as the index continued to rally. The gap between the two widened this quarter in the wake of a disappointing third-quarter earnings report from IBM, which included its sixth straight quarterly decline in revenue.
Valued at just 10.2 times the next 12 months' earnings-per-share estimate, the stock -- which is the worst performer in the Dow this year, with a 6% loss -- could now represent an opportunity for patient investors. At today's closing price of $182.83, the stock price is not much above Bloomberg's $171 estimate of Berkshire Hathaway's per-share cost basis on its 68.1 million-share position. Berkshire Hathaway began accumulating shares in early 2011 and continued buying them through the first half of this year. And if you're looking for perspective on last quarter's earnings, this is what Warren Buffett told Charlie Rose at the end of October: "They will have record per-share earnings this year. That can be disappointing if you expected more. But it is not a bad record, believe me."
With a 13.5% year-to-date rise, shares of Chevron are not the worst performers in the Dow, but they did lag the broad market by a pretty good margin. Still, that's the case of every oil and gas "supermajor" this year, as investors raised concerns regarding Big Oil's ability to boost production and reserves -- and the level of investment required to achieve this.
At 10.3 times the next 12 months' earnings-per-estimate, Chevron shares are cheaper, on that measure, than those of the other Dow supermajor, ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), at 12.6 times. I would remind investors that Buffett added 40.1 million shares of the latter to Berkshire Hathaway's portfolio this year -- the largest new position since he bought IBM. As I see it, both stocks look attractive today, if you're ready to invest over an equity-appropriate minimum holding period of three to five years.
Investors weren't impressed with Cisco Systems' last two quarterly earnings reports, and the stock, which was outperforming the S&P 500 on a year-to-date basis through nearly the entire third quarter, is now close to 20 percentage points behind the index. During the last earnings report, in particular, analysts and investors were aghast by the low guidance the company provided for the current quarter (try a year-on-year revenue decline of between 8% and 10% on for size!). As an explanation, CEO John Chambers pointed the finger at depressed demand for Cisco's products across emerging markets.
Nevertheless, at just 10.8 times the next 12 months' earnings per share, the stock's valuation appears to offer some protection against the risk of a near-term slowdown in demand. Intelligent investors will to ask themselves: Five years from now, will global demand for Cisco's products be higher than it is today or lower? If the answer is yes, how we get there is a secondary issue -- some volatility in demand is to be expected.



Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Although I haven't had the chance to ask Warren Buffett what he'd like for Christmas, I imagine his letter to Santa would look something like this:
SOURCE: RECITETHIS.COM 
Dear Santa,
2013 has been a solid year for Berkshire Hathaway (NYSE:BRK.A) (NYSE:BRK.B), and I'm thankful for that. We bought Heinz -- they make ketchup, which is red, just like your sleigh -- for a tidy $28 billion in partnership with 3G Capital, and I'm certain it was a great investment in a great company.
We also added a nice $3.4 billion position in ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), which places it just behind Wal-Mart in our portfolio. I suspect your elves aren't the biggest fans of Wal-Mart, as it provides quite a bit of competition in the toy landscape, but I'm certain you all have a competitive edge. Exxon could likely help you out if you every run into any issues with heat in the North Pole -- they know a thing or two about energy. I also suspect they could make your coal production phenomenally more cost effective. I hear there have been some naughty CEOs this year.
As you know, I'm also a tremendous fan of Coca-Cola (NYSE:KO), and based on what I've seen, it looks like you are too. I have a nice cold Cherry Coke with the See's Candies -- they're better than cookies -- next to the fireplace for a little nourishment for you before you journey out of Omaha.
IMAGE SOURCE: FLICKR/ELLIOT BROWN 
Speaking of your sleigh, did you know I also have managed to accumulate a $19.1 billion position in Wells Fargo (NYSE:WFC)? I assume you did, as John Stumpf and his team are undoubtedly on your nice list. But the reason I ask is because their logo of the horse drawn carriage makes me wonder if you moonlight for them in the spring and summer months? Simply a thought.
PHOTO: ANDY RUSCH
It's also worth mentioning that if you're ever in the mood for a different way to travel, I'd highly recommend you consider a NetJet. It is a wonderful way to get largely anywhere in the world. Your sleigh is fast, but a private jet is tough to compete with. And if you're ever looking for a new set of boots, perhaps you should consider Brooks shoes, they're wildly comfortable. I image Mrs. Claus makes your suit, but if you need an extra layer, I'd suggest something our team at Fruit of the Loom came up with. In the interest of full disclosure, Berkshire Hathaway owns all of those as well.
But enough about that. I just have a few simple requests for Christmas. The first is about our good friends at IBM. I hope the whole "Big Blue" thing doesn't bother you, considering you're a fan of red and all. I first started buying their shares in the summer of 2011 -- when the price was right around $175 -- which is almost exactly what it stands at today. I don't need much, but I'd love it if you could give their engineers a new product to bring to market or something that'll get the stock price inching upwards.
A few Christmas's ago you also gave me ammunition for my "elephant gun" And while I've searched, I still can't find a company to use it on. Everything is mighty expensive in 2013, so a safari trip where I'm assured of spotting some big game would be great to unwrap on Christmas morning. That, or a brief moment of market panic. That's usually when I make my big bucks!
I know you're a busy man much like myself, so this is my last request, but I'd really appreciate it if you could get folks to stop asking me who will succeed me as chairman of Berkshire Hathaway. No one asks you who your successor will be, so I'm not sure why they're so compelled to do the same for me. Perhaps you'd leave me a bag of coal to send to any journalist who speculates on the subject. We've decided who it is; can't that be enough for them?
Thanks again for all the gifts over the years -- here's to hoping 2014 is as good a year as the last 83.
Sincerely,
Warren



Before you consider The Coca-Cola Company, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and The Coca-Cola Company wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


