Although we don't believe in timing the market or panicking over daily movements, we do like to keep an eye on market changes -- just in case they're material to our investing thesis.
Right around the same time the Federal Reserve released its most recent meeting minutes this afternoon, all three of the major U.S. indexes headed south. After sitting higher for the majority of the morning, the Dow Jones Industrial Average ended today's session down 89 points, or 0.56%. The S&P 500 lost 0.65%, and the Nasdaq snapped an eight-day winning streak with a decline of 0.82%.
Language in the Fed minutes that suggest more tapering in the months to come spooked investors who believe the economy is weakening. Data released both this morning and yesterday have brought news of lackluster job growth and an apparently slowing housing market. If the taper continues, some investors think the potentially fragile economy will fall back into another recession.
Only six of the Dow's 30 components finished in the black today. Two of them were Verizon (NYSE:VZ), leading the charge with a 1.2% jump, and AT&T (NYSE:T), up 0.09%. Both stocks rose on news that the FCC won't challenge a court ruling on net neutrality that was favorable to Verizon, AT&T, and other Internet providers. Instead, the commission will propose a new rule that will ban providers from blocking websites or charging bandwidth hogs like Netflix and YouTube extra for optimal delivery of their content.
Until such a rule is in place, Verizon and AT&T can claim victory. Verizon benefits more than AT&T because its FiOS service is much more widespread than AT&T's home Internet service. Furthermore, both stocks are high dividend payers, which are safe havens during times of volatility.
Another big winner today was Chevron (NYSE:CVX), which rose 0.79% while fellow oil giant ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) fell 0.13%. There was very little news today pertaining to either company to explain the divergence, but Chevron offers a higher dividend yield (3.5% compared with Exxon's 2.7%) and is trading at a slightly more favorable valuation (10 times past earnings, versus 12 for Exxon). What's strange is that the price of natural gas jumped another 10.77% today, while oil rose just 0.86%. That should be perceived as a positive for both companies, not just Chevron.
Regardless of whether you hold one of these telecoms or oil companies, you shouldn't be concerned about today's moves, as they don't appear to have been related to any material changes. And no one knows what will happen if the Fed keeps tapering, so there's no point in worrying about it. Just keep focusing on buying healthy companies that will continue to do well regardless of the economic condition.


Before you consider AT&T Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and AT&T Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Although we don't believe in timing the market or panicking over daily movements, we do like to keep an eye on market changes -- just in case they're material to our investing thesis.
Ordinarily, dour economic data can have a depressing effect on the stock market. Yet even after the Commerce Department said that housing starts in the U.S. plunged by 16% last month, their biggest drop since early 2011, the Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI) had posted a gain of 72 points as of 11 a.m. EST. Home improvement retailer Home Depot (NYSE:HD) dropped slightly on the news, but gains from energy giants Chevron (NYSE:CVX) and ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) outweighed the downward impact from Home Depot's modest decline.
As we've seen with a number of other readings on the economy lately, weather almost certainly played a big impact on January's housing starts numbers. Even though seasonal adjustments already take into account the usual weather patterns that discourage starts in the winter months, last month's particularly cold temperatures appeared to play a particularly big role in the Midwest region, where starts fell by more than two-thirds. Yet a jump of more than 60% in the Northeast challenges that theory, and drops in other areas of the country where weather played less of a role point to underlying housing weakness.
Home Depot's drop of 0.8% follows a similar decline yesterday after sentiment among homebuilding companies plunged in February, according to the National Association of Home Builders. Weather was a factor there, too, but a lack of skilled labor and availability of building materials also created concerns about the state of the industry. Home Depot has a good mix of business from both contractors and homeowners, and anything that threatens its contractor business could undermine the impressive growth the stock has produced in recent years.
On the energy front, though, Chevron jumped 1.8%, while ExxonMobil climbed 0.7%. Prices of both crude oil and refined products have been on the rise lately, as high winter-related demand has started to impact longer-term projections for supplies. Some weather experts expect continued cold conditions in March, and that could lead to a delay in the point at which suppliers stop drawing down their stockpiles and start rebuilding them for the next season. Refiners are particularly benefiting from that trend, and with Chevron and Exxon both retaining their integrated refining operations, they stand to benefit somewhat here. In the long run, though, the question is whether the market will support $100 oil and $5 natural gas, as both companies' production divisions represent the biggest part of their revenues.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


