PHOTO CREDIT: BP PLC. 
Wall Street might be on vacation, holding fast to their "sell in May and go away" mantra, but we're still on the lookout for compelling stocks to buy this summer. In fact, we've uncovered three really cheap energy stocks have been unfairly sold off by the market. Read on to find out which three energy stocks we think are great buys this July. 
Bob Ciura: I believe European integrated energy giant BP (NYSE:BP) is a great stock to buy this month, for a few reasons. First, shares of BP have been beaten down in the past year, not surprisingly due to the crash in oil and gas prices. Over the past 12 months, BP stock is down 25%. But I believe this has opened up an excellent buying opportunity, because BP is cheap and its dividend yield has spiked.
At $39 per share, BP stock trades for 1.1 times book value and 5 times enterprise value to EBITDA. And, thanks to its declining stock price, its dividend yield has been elevated to 6%. This is a very attractive valuation and dividend profile. While BP's earnings have been hurt by lower commodity prices, but there's reason to believe BP can weather the storm.
First, it's important to remember BP is an integrated company. Unlike exploration and production companies that are entirely reliant on supportive commodity prices, BP has a large refining business that actually does better when oil prices fall. BP's downstream profits more than doubled last quarter, to $2.2 billion. This helped offset an 86% decline in upstream profits.
Plus, BP has finally settled on the civil trial pertaining to the 2010 Gulf of Mexico oil spill. BP will pay $18.7 billion. This includes a $5.5 billion civil penalty to the United States under the Clean Water Act, $7.1 billion to the United States and the five Gulf states for natural resource damages, $4.9 billion to cover economic and other claims made by the states, and lastly up to $1 billion paid to 400-plus local government entities.
This is a major step forward for BP and its shareholders. The payments will be spread out over 18 years, so the fines are entirely manageable. And, now that investors know exactly what the settlement will be, investors are relieved of a huge lingering uncertainty hanging over BP's head. 
Jason Hall: One of the few segments of the oil and gas business that has been relatively safe for investors over the past year has been pipeline operators:
However, this hasn't been the case for ONEOK (NYSE:OKE) or its master limited partnership, ONEOK Partners (NYSE:OKS), both of which are down more than 30% before dividends paid.

OKE TOTAL RETURN PRICE DATA BY YCHARTS
The reason why? Natural gas liquids.
