
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Dividend stocks have been shown to outperform non-dividend-paying stocks, so it's not too surprising that investors have been tucking more dividend-paying companies into their portfolios. While many dividend stocks are trading at historically high price valuations, these three dividend stocks could be bargains worth buying.
Seagate Technology (NASDAQ:STX) has seen its sales slip as demand for PCs has waned, but a pick-up in demand for hard drives from companies providing cloud-based solutions could put Seagate Technology's sales back on track soon. 
Seagate's biggest competitor, Western Digital, recently upped its sales and profit outlook, citing an improving product mix. That improvement is likely due to rising demand for cloud memory solutions, and if it is, then Seagate should see a bump in its business, too.
Seagate has already said that demand from cloud service providers was better than expected in Q2 after "several quarters of relatively modest demand." They also said that a shift "from client server to mobile cloud applications and storage environments" will contribute to future "revenue growth, product gross margin improvements, and improved profitability."
We won't know for a bit longer whether Seagate's business is stabilizing, but investors willing to take on the risk of buying Seagate's shares could end up getting paid handsomely. Despite a 16% rally in Seagate's shares last month, they still yield a market-trouncing 7%.
After losing patent protection on its megablockbuster cholesterol drug Lipitor in 2011, Pfizer Inc.'s (NYSE:PFE) sales have been sliding for years. Fortunately, that trend may be ending.
Pfizer has notched six consecutive quarters of operational growth through Q2, and thanks to newly launched superstars, including the breast-cancer drug Ibrance, management thinks revenue will eclipse $51 billion this year. If they're correct, then Pfizer will deliver its first year-over-year top-line growth since 2011.

PFE REVENUE (ANNUAL) DATA BY YCHARTS
Pfizer's return to sales growth, cost-cutting during its lean years, and a slate of recent acquisitions suggests Pfizer is about to become an increasingly profitable company.
Pfizer expects to deliver $2.38 per share in earnings this year, up from $2.20 last year, and assuming the trend continues, there should be plenty of financial firepower available to increase its dividend payout. Since shares are already yielding a healthy 3.5%, stashing this company's shares away now may be savvy.
ExxonMobil Corporation (NYSE:XOM) is an energy giant that makes its money by discovering and refining oil and gas, and because it boasts one of the industry's healthiest balance sheets, it ranks as my top pick for dividend-hungry investors looking to buy energy stocks.
Oil and natural gas prices have nose-dived in the past year because of surging global production and tepid global economic growth, but ExxonMobil's refining and chemicals operations have offset much of that drop in commodity prices, and as a result, the company reported $1.8 billion in earnings in Q1 and $1.7 billion in earnings in Q2. 
Although the company's first- and second-quarter sales trends put it on track to earn far less than the $16.2 billion it made last year, oil and natural gas prices won't be low forever. When they do improve, ExxonMobil's cost-cutting this past year may give it more profit-friendly leverage than it's had in the past. 
ExxonMobil still has the financial firepower necessary to acquire assets from its peers at bargain-basement prices, and it's got the cash flow necessary to keep dividends flowing to investors. Since ExxonMobil has increased its dividend by an average 6.4% per year over the past 33 years (it currently yields 3.45%) and its shares can be bought cheaper than they've been in the past, there's a lot to like about buying this stock on sale.


Before you consider Pfizer Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Pfizer Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021



IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
While it is easy to get caught up in dividend stocks with a high yield, investors tend to earn higher returns by investing in companies that pay a growing dividend. While several energy stocks have managed to grow their dividends in good times, only the best handful have succeeded in raising their payout throughout more than one energy cycle.
Here are five champions that have delivered consistent dividend growth for more than a decade:
Dividend Champions of Energy
Enterprise Value
Current Yield
Signs of a Dividend Champion
ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM)
$405 billion
3.41%
34 consecutive years of dividend increases, and it has paid a dividend for more than 100 years
Enterprise Products Partners (NYSE:EPD)
$80 billion
5.75%
48 consecutive quarterly dividend increases -- 57 since going public in 1998
Enbridge (NYSE:ENB)
$77 billion
3.49%
21 consecutive years of dividend increases, and it has paid a dividend for more than 63 years
TransCanada (NYSE:TRP)
$74 billion
3.47%
16 consecutive years of dividend increases
Occidental Petroleum (NYSE:OXY)
$60 billion
4.15%
14 consecutive years of dividend increases, with the rate up more than 500% since 2002
DATA SOURCE: COMPANY PRESS RELEASES AND INVESTOR WEB PAGES.
Oil giant ExxonMobil is a true dividend champion: Its stock is one of only 51 that qualify as a Dividend Aristocrat -- a stock that has increased its payout for more than 25 consecutive years. What makes this a truly impressive feat is that Exxon can increase its payout even though its business is producing oil, which has a highly volatile price. Exxon offsets some of that volatility through its downstream and chemicals segments, which tend to be countercyclical. For example, last year Exxon's upstream earnings plunged $20.4 billion due to weak oil prices. However, a $6.6 billion increase in downstream earnings and a $102 million rise in chemical earnings helped soften the blow. Those offsetting results, combined with a strong balance sheet, enable the company to continue growing its dividend.
U.S. midstream giant Enterprise Products Partners primarily owns fee-based assets like pipelines and processing plants, resulting in relatively stable cash flow. Meanwhile, the company drove its payout higher through a combination of strategic acquisitions and organic growth projects. Currently, the company has $5.6 billion of primarily fee-based capital projects under construction and expected to go into service through 2018. Thanks to those, Enterprise Products Partners should not have any problem keeping its dividend growth streak alive.
Canadian pipeline giant Enbridge is similar to Enterprise Products Partners in that it too owns primarily fee-based assets. In fact, 96% of the company's revenue comes from fees or regulated earnings, which provides very stable cash flow. Further, Enbridge also has a long history of buying or building fee-based assets, and it currently has an enormous $26 billion backlog of projects under development. Because of that backlog, and a recent acquisition, Enbridge expects to deliver 10% to 12% annual dividend growth through 2024.
TransCanada shares many similarities with its Canadian pipeline counterpart. The biggest difference is that only slightly more than 90% of its revenue comes from fee-based assets, though the company is working to increase that by selling its U.S. merchant-power business. Another major difference is that TransCanada does not project growing its dividend by quite as rapid a rate in the future; it projects 8% to 10% compound annual growth through 2020. That said, a significant acquisition could enable the company to deliver stronger growth than anticipated.
Occidental Petroleum is one of the few oil companies that was able to increase its dividend this year. That is because it has countercyclical chemicals assets as well as midstream assets, which help smooth out cash flow. In addition, the bulk of Occidental's production comes from enhanced oil recovery projects in the Permian Basin, which deliver stable output and lucrative margins. Add to that a cash-rich balance sheet, and Occidental Petroleum has the financial flexibility to continue growing its payout.
There's one thing that sets these dividend champions apart from other energy stocks. Each owns assets that mute its direct exposure to volatile commodity prices. Those countercyclical or fee-based assets help to stabilize cash flow, enabling these companies not only to maintain their payout, but also to have the capacity to grow it even when times are tough.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


