We're not even halfway through 2020 yet, and there's little question in my mind we'll be talking about it for a generation to come. In a span of 33 calendar days, beginning on Feb. 19, panic and uncertainty surrounding the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic sent the benchmark S&P 500 down by 34%. This was the fastest descent from an all-time high in the stock market's history, and it triggered the highest volatility reading ever on the CBOE Volatility Index.
Yet, over the subsequent 10 weeks, the S&P 500 has rallied 40%, and now has its old highs at least within sight. Investors have seemingly experienced a decade's worth of volatility in a span of 3.5 months.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
With emotions running high, there's perhaps no better investment consideration than dividend stocks. Companies that share a percentage of their profits with their investors often have time-tested business models and a clear expectation for continued growth. Receiving a dividend during times of heightened fear can also keep long-term investors from making a hasty decision and selling their stake in a great business.
The challenge is finding the right dividend stocks to buy. We'd all like the highest yield possible with the least risk -- unfortunately, risk and yield tend to be correlated. This means that high-yield dividend stocks can occasionally be more trouble than they're worth. But that's not always the case.
If you have $5,000 in disposable cash that you won't need to pay bills or cover emergencies, then the following four high-yield dividend stocks look like veritable money machines for income seekers.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Arguably the safest high-yield dividend stock you can buy is telecom giant AT&T (NYSE:T). Even though AT&T's high-growth days are long gone, and the company shelved its share buyback program to conserve cash in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic, the company's juicy 6.6% yield and its 36-year streak of increasing its payout are perfectly safe.
One of the most intriguing near-term catalysts for AT&T is the ongoing rollout of 5G networks. Though upgrading its wireless infrastructure won't be cheap, the payoff should be a multiyear technology upgrade cycle that leads to a steady and significant uptick in data usage. Data has always been the key margin driver for AT&T's wireless segment.
Additionally, AT&T expects to benefit from the launch of the HBO Max streaming service, which occurred on May 27. An HBO Max subscription comes with more than 10,000 hours of premium content, and it could be just the dangling carrot needed to offset traditional cable cord-cutting.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
