The S&P 500 is down 10% in 2020 and the markets have been showing a lot of volatility, especially since the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic in March. However, not all industries and not all types of stocks have been hit equally. There are some industries facing much more risk today than others. And if you're not sure where to invest right now, a safe choice might be in healthcare.
Healthcare is on everyone's minds these days as concerns surrounding COVID-19 are front and center on every newscast. Not only are people with COVID-19 suffering, but patients with other diseases and illnesses are also struggling as hospitals have pushed many of them down the priority list in an effort to free up resources. Even when there's not a pandemic to heighten people's needs for healthcare products and services, those things are still essential, and demand for them is a lot more consistent than other industries may experience.
As risky as Johnson & Johnson (NYSE:JNJ) may appear to be as an investment -- the company is facing lawsuits relating to opioids, talc baby powder, and other products -- it's still going strong, with sales up 3.3% in first-quarter 2020 over the prior year and net earnings reaching $5.8 billion, an increase of 55%. Lower expenses propelled the company's profit margin from 18.7% a year ago to 28% in Q1.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
But strong numbers are just what investors have come to expect from the stock over the years. In fiscal 2019, the company netted $15.1 billion in profit on sales of $82.1 billion. In 2018, the numbers were similar, with earnings of $15.3 billion on $81.6 billion in revenue. In both years, Johnson & Johnson's profit margin was comfortably over 18%. And while the company is expecting some challenges this year, it's still projecting a profit. Management lowered their guidance for earnings per share (EPS) this year due to the coronavirus, bringing their estimates from a range of $8.95 to $9.10 to between $7.50 and $7.90. Many companies in other industries would be happy to record any sort of profits at all.
Shares of Johnson & Johnson are up a modest 2% so far this year. You would have earned more investing in Amazon (NASDAQ:AMZN), which is up 29% over the same time. But tech stocks are more volatile than healthcare stocks, and the e-commerce giant is trading at more than 100 times its earnings over the past 12 months -- not to mention recently falling short of expectations in its most recent earnings report. Investing in Amazon may not be the slam dunk it was in the past. Tech stocks often trade at high valuations, and that can be risky heading into a recession, when many investors may start to prioritize value and stability over long-term growth.
Unlike many tech stocks, Johnson & Johnson also pays a dividend; its yield of 2.7% is higher than the 2% payout of the average S&P 500 stock. Not only does such a dividend add recurring cash flow for your portfolio, it can be a way to help boost those overall returns.
It's not hard to find a lot of risk in the market these days -- just look airlines or oil and gas stocks:

JNJ DATA BY YCHARTS
Johnson & Johnson's single-digit returns look incredible compared with the losses that Boeing (NYSE:BA) and ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) have incurred this year. Boeing has been hit by a huge reduction in demand for air travel as a result of the coronavirus pandemic -- first-quarter results released April 29 showed a loss of $641 million for the period. Investors were already down on the stock because of its grounded 737 Max planes, and now with demand for air travel next to nonexistent, there's little reason to be bullish on airlines. Boeing CEO Dave Calhoun isn't sugarcoating things, either, saying he expects that it may take up to three years for demand to recover.
ExxonMobil is dealing with a related issue: low oil prices. If people aren't traveling, demand for oil is softened. And because there was already an oversupply of oil in the markets, this low demand has sent prices crashing; the price of a barrel even fell below $0 at one point in April. On May 1, ExxonMobil reported a $610 million loss as it recorded writedowns due to low oil prices.
The challenge for Exxon and other oil and gas companies is that unless the price of oil recovers, which at this point appears unlikely to happen anytime soon, even tougher news may be in store for investors this year and in 2021.
In 2020, earning a good double-digit return may be a pipe dream. Simply avoiding losses may be an achievement this year. And a good place to earn a modest return along with a great dividend is in healthcare. Johnson & Johnson is a Dividend Aristocrat, and the company increased its dividend payments in April for the 58th straight year, hiking the payout by 6.3%.
ExxonMobil had been upping its dividend, too -- notching increases for more than 10 years in a row -- but that streak came to an end last month. The company had to freeze its dividend due to the challenges it's facing, and investors shouldn't rule out the complete elimination or suspension of the payouts, especially if oil prices remain low and conditions in the industry do not improve. However, that's still better than Boeing, which announced in March that it will suspend its payouts. The company doesn't expect to pay dividends again for years.
Healthcare stocks offer investors more consistency than stocks in other industries, and many of them also pay dividends as well. That's why investors who are looking for a safe place to invest right now may find healthcare their best option.



Before you consider The Boeing Company, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and The Boeing Company wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Short-term oversupply paired with what is realistically a 20% or more decrease in demand has crippled oil prices. Hovering in the $20 to $30 range, oil prices are at levels simply unprofitable for most companies in the industry.
As one of the largest integrated oil and gas companies in the world, ExxonMobil's (NYSE:XOM) response to this low oil environment provides a good indicator for what to expect from the industry this year.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Where ExxonMobil will be in one year is largely dependent on the speed and effectiveness of the global economic recovery, since the company relies on growing oil and gas use to fund new projects.
Unfortunately, a lot of Exxon's prior predictions simply aren't relevant at today's oil prices. Just a few months ago, Exxon expected its "earnings potential to double by 2025 in a flat real price and constant margin environment," but that assumption is based on 2017 actual earnings and $60 Brent prices, adjusted for inflation, over the next five years. 
In its first-quarter 2020 earnings release, Exxon reiterated its assumption that long-term oil and gas fundamentals remain strong, because oil and gas remains competitive with renewables and there are still around 800 million people in the world without electricity. 
This rhetoric is nothing new for those familiar with Exxon. Compared to other energy majors, ExxonMobil runs more of a strictly oil and gas portfolio. Instead of investing in renewables like wind and solar, Exxon's investments in biofuels and carbon capture and storage represent its core belief that the best use of its time and money is by making the oil and gas industry more environmentally friendly and profitable. 
Exxon's unrelenting focus on oil and gas means the company is unlikely to even moderately diversify its portfolio with renewables anytime soon.
Despite its bullish long-term thesis, Exxon is implementing a 30% reduction in capital expenditures and a 15% reduction in cash operating expenditures from original planned levels. That 30% reduction will mostly affect the company's Permian investments, which are shorter-term, more flexible projects that depend on higher oil prices to breakeven. For what spending is left, Exxon will continue to invest in megaprojects like Liza Phase 1, part of a larger strategy in Guyana to produce more than 750,000 barrels per day (bpd) by 2026 (pushed back one year from 2025). 
Reducing spending does have consequences, namely delaying larger projects and reducing production from smaller projects. For example, the company expects a 15,000 bpd decrease in Permian production in 2020 and a 100,000 to 150,000 bpd reduction in 2021. 
Virtually every other supermajor is implementing similar cost-cutting practices, which should reduce 2020 supply and projects for the next couple of years.
In reality, reduced production could be a good thing for the industry. Taking the collapse in demand seriously by cutting production could leave the industry undersupplied in a few years, which could lead to higher oil prices. There's a good chance that many smaller producers will go bankrupt, lacking the deep pockets of a supermajor to weather the storm.
Oil companies are arguably better off in an undersupplied market that focuses on higher prices, not producing as much as possible.
This downturn will probably raise the barriers to entry into the oil business, since Wall Street is generally unwilling to back companies, even if they accept high interest rate loans. In many ways, there is a silver lining for Exxon on the other side of this dark and difficult time.
Although it's going to be tough in the short term, there's a very good chance that Exxon investors will get an 8% dividend yield. "Our objective is to continue investing in industry-advantaged projects to create value, preserve cash for the dividend and make appropriate and prudent use of our balance sheet," said Exxon in its April 7 press release.
It's up for debate whether Exxon as a company would be better off suspending the dividend to give it extra cash to survive the present downturn, but Exxon has a reputation for being a reliable dividend stock despite market cycles. It's worth noting that Exxon is a Dividend Aristocrat, having raised its dividend for 37 consecutive years, and hasn't cut its payout since 1948 (split-adjusted). This is no small accomplishment for Exxon considering the ups and downs that the oil market faced during that 37-year time frame.
Like many oil and gas companies, Exxon will devote the next year to spending less money and producing less oil. Exxon's long-term commitments to megaprojects like those in Guyana and Brazil are dependent on higher oil prices and an economic recovery. Exxon's hope is that global production will decrease, prices will rise, the global economy will recover, and it will win out in this unprecedented test of the survival of the fittest. In the meantime, Exxon is paying investors to wait with a large and stable dividend.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Investors have signaled their optimism, making April one of the best months in market history; the SPDR S&P 500 ETF Trust (NYSEMKT:SPY) is off only 9.3% since the beginning of 2020, even with the economy still in freefall. Oil stocks, on the other hand, continue to lag. The Energy Select Sector SPDR ETF (NYSEMKT:XLE), representing the oil and gas stocks in the S&P 500, is down more than 36%. 
For many investors, this points sharply at Big Oil -- the biggest companies in the oil patch -- as being great investments as one of the few sectors that is still well below 2020 highs. The risk, of course, is mistaking size for strength; we've already seen several Big Oil companies cut their dividends, and it's entirely possible we could see one or more go bankrupt before this downturn is over. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
But there are still opportunities to buy; even the best of Big Oil is still more discounted than the rest of the market, and the best-of-breed companies should prove winners once the economy and the oil sector recover. To help you identify the best picks, we asked five of our top contributors with expertise in the energy space for their top Big Oil stocks to buy and hold, and they came back with Enterprise Products Partners (NYSE:EPD), ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP), ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), Total (NYSE:TOT), and Phillips 66 (NYSE:PSX). 
Keep reading to find out why. 
Tyler Crowe (Enterprise Products Partners): Enterprise Products Partners may not have the name recognition of other Big Oil companies, but its presence in the North American oil and gas industry is immense. The master limited partnership owns one of the largest networks of pipelines, processing facilities, and logistics assets in the U.S. and has churned out cash to investors at a steady for rate for decades. Over the past few years, though, management has been keeping its payout growth rate at a trickle because it wanted to spend on projects while also shoring up its financials. So it's pretty serendipitous that the company is possibly in the strongest financial position it has ever been in as the oil and gas market gets devastated.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
In the latest earnings release, Enterprise's management said it was significantly scaling back capital spending for both 2020 and 2021. Before it made these moves, the company's cash from operations had generated $7.4 billion over the prior 12 months, compared with $4.4 billion in capital spending. Management now anticipates that its 2020 capital spending will be between $2.7 billion and $3.2 billion. These reductions coupled with a business much more insulated from commodity prices should give it the cash it needs to weather this storm and remain in decent financial shape.
It's unreasonable to expect that the company's earnings won't suffer somewhat from this downturn. Also, management will probably have to tap some short-term credit lines to keep some cash on the books. Based on its current financial position, though, it is relatively well positioned to handle a downturn and could make for an attractive income investment today. 
Matt DiLallo (ConocoPhillips): Last year, oil giant ConocoPhillips laid out an ambitious 10-year plan designed to return cash to investors. The company's strategy put it on track to pay out $50 billion via dividends and share repurchases over the next decade if oil averaged $50 a barrel. Fueling that plan was its low-cost oil resources, which can generate a gusher of profits when oil is above $40 a barrel.
Unfortunately, the company ran into a bit of a speed bump this year because of cratering crude prices. It did temporarily suspend its share repurchase program in response so that it can maintain financial flexibility during this downturn.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
However, ConocoPhillips should be able to get back on track with its plan as soon as oil prices recover. That's because it has the financial strength to get through this downturn thanks to its top-notch balance sheet backed by an $8 billion cash position and a low-cost resource base that should become a cash flow machine once again when oil prices improve. Those factors make the oil giant an ideal one to buy and hold for the long term.
John Bromels (ExxonMobil): Most investors probably shouldn't be buying oil stocks -- even Big Oil stocks -- right now. The short-term outlook for the industry is uncertain at best, oil prices have been hitting record lows, and there's so much crude oil filling up every nook and cranny of U.S. storage that it will take months, if not years, to work through it. 
The integrated majors are probably going to come out the other end of this crisis in relatively decent shape, thanks to their ability to leverage their size and their balance sheets. However, as Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.A)(NYSE:RDS.B) showed everyone on April 30, when it cut its dividend by 66%, even size can only take you so far. 

XOM DIVIDEND DATA BY YCHARTS
I'm picking ExxonMobil as the top choice in a weak field. Its dividend yield is currently 7.9%, and its long history of annual dividend increases -- 37 years and counting! -- is going to encourage the company to use every means at its disposal to avoid losing that coveted Dividend Aristocrat status. If you're not a risk-tolerant investor, though, you should probably consider other options in the energy sector.
Travis Hoium (Total): Big oil companies have the advantage of being more diversified than many of their smaller competitors, but where they have diversification is important. For example, right now, owning a diverse set of oil production and pipeline assets may not be valuable because oil prices and consumption are down, so both businesses are struggling. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Total's diversification beyond oil exploration and production comes from both downstream distribution of oil and refined products and alternative sources of energy. The company generated 11% of revenue in 2019 from marketing and services with another 16.4% of revenue from integrated gas, renewables, and power. Renewable energy, in particular, has gotten more focus as management tries to diversify into wind and solar asset ownership and new models like electric vehicle charging stations. 
Most of Total's business is still centered on the production and refining of oil, and that will be critical to its recovery. But the company has made steps to move into new forms of energy, such as renewables, and that's why I like its position among Big Oil stocks. As the energy landscape changes and oil becomes less profitable, a diversity of energy sources will serve the company well. Ironically, it's the non-oil parts of the business that makes me think this Big Oil company will outperform rivals. 
Jason Hall (Phillips 66):2020 will not just be a lost year for most oil companies, but a year that moves them backwards. The companies that come through the 2020 oil crash as a going interest will, as a group, have more debt and less cash than they started with. The few that come out with less debt and more cash will be the ones that go bankrupt and wipe out shareholders. Either way, 2020 will weigh heavily on the industry, and investors, for years. 
But one Big Oil stock that's built to ride out the downturn and quickly emerge a winner is Phillips 66. With no oil production, its cash flows should hold up much better than those of other majors.

PSX TOTAL RETURN PRICE DATA BY YCHARTS
For instance, the company lost $2.5 billion in Q1, because of $3 billion in non-cash impairments. Impairments like this aren't good per se -- they're a reduction in future earnings an asset was expected to produce -- but these were non-cash moves. Adjusting for the impairments, Phillips 66 earned $450 million in Q1. The big difference here is oil producers and even the integrated majors with oil production segments are facing declines in their cash flows that could prove much larger than Phillips 66 will see. 
Yes, its refining, fuel marketing, and the gathering part of its midstream segment have tough times ahead as oil demand stays low. But petrochemical demand --nthink plastic containers for sanitizer and cleaning products -- is on the rise, and its natural gas midstream operations are strong and stable. 
A sure sign Phillips 66 is a strong bet: The board announced on May 6 it will maintain the quarterly dividend at $0.90 per share. While many peers are slashing payouts, Phillips 66 is able to keep paying investors to hold through the downturn. Most importantly, its business is built to benefit from an economic recovery more quickly than its peers in the oil production business. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


