
MICROSOFT'S DOLLAR VOLUME TOWERS OVER THE OTHER 29 DOW STOCKS.
Microsoft (NASDAQ:MSFT) is not the largest company on the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI) ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) holds that crown with a $402 billion market cap, relegating Microsoft's $287 billion cap to second place. Eleven Dow components sport higher annual revenues than Microsoft's $80.4 billion, led by Exxon at $398 billion and Wal-Mart (NYSE:WMT) at $475 billion. The software giant is not the Dow's most profitable company, either, or its fastest-growing member.
But there's one place where neither Wal-Mart nor Exxon, or any other Dow member for that matter, can touch Microsoft. It's the Dow's most popular stock, judging by the average daily dollar volumes traded.
A total of $1.8 billion of Microsoft stock changes hands every day, leaving Exxon far behind in second place with a $1.2 billion daily dollar volume. Wal-Mart is nowhere near the top, sitting in the middle of the 30 Dow components with just $614 million of daily trading action to its name.
In fact, Microsoft shifts more dollar volume every day than nearly any other stock on the market. Apple (NASDAQ:AAPL) rules the roost with a totally unchallenged $6.7 billion daily action. Google also runs in front at $1.8 billion -- a rounding error ahead of Microsoft.
So what makes Microsoft so special? Why should investors care about daily trading volumes? I can think of at least two important reasons:
With billion-dollar daily trading volumes, Microsoft is one of the market's most liquid stocks. Fools should still prefer setting their price for every trade with limit orders rather than blindly accepting whatever your broker sees as the current market price, but if you're ever going to use a market order, Microsoft and Apple would be fairly safe bets.
In the world of open-source software development, you'll find Linus' Law: "Given enough eyeballs, all bugs are shallow." In other words, let a ton of smart people examine your code, and every problem will soon be apparent -- and fixed. The same idea applies to the stock market; investors just know the idea as the "efficient markets" hypothesis or "the wisdom of crowds." You're more likely to get a fair price on stocks that are evaluated by thousands of investors every day. Ergo, Microsoft and Google are probably closer to fair value than most stocks at any given moment.
I'm not saying that Wal-Mart or Exxon are speculative, or that the high volumes of Apple, Google, and Microsoft somehow makes them safer investments. Even the least popular Dow stocks see nearly $200 million in daily trading, after all. We're hardly talking about microvolume penny stocks here. But the safety in numbers around Wal-Mart's shares applies more strongly to the higher-volume tickers -- and the popularity title is a rare feather in Microsoft's hat.
Nobody ever complained about being No. 1, right?




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Chevron (NYSE:CVX) has had a reasonably good 2013, even though it hasn't been able to keep up with the even stronger performance of the Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI) over the course of the year. Although it performed much more strongly during the first half of the year than rivals ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), BP (NYSE:BP), and ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP), Chevron allowed its competitors' returns to catch up with it more recently. The raises the question of whether Chevron faces big challenges for 2014 that it could have difficulty meeting, or whether it's positioning itself for another breakout move higher in the new year.
Chevron has generally done a good job in facing its toughest challenge and keeping production levels growing to the greatest extent possible. With energy prices down over the past year, that goal-meeting hasn't translated into overall revenue growth for Chevron. But with the economy in the U.S. and worldwide starting to get back on track for faster growth rates, rising energy demand could support prices even in a time of plentiful supply and give Chevron shareholders the increased profits they want to see. Let's take a closer look at Chevron's prospects for 2014.
FALLING GAS PRICES ARE JUST ONE OF THE CHALLENGES CHEVRON COULD FACE IN 2014.
Stats on Chevron
Average stock target price
$132.33
Full-year 2013 EPS estimate
$11.44
Full-year 2014 EPS estimate
$11.86
Full-year 2013 sales growth estimate
(2%)
Full-year 2014 sales growth estimate
2.1%
Forward P/E
10.4
SOURCE: YAHOO FINANCE.
What's in store for Chevron's 2014?
Analysts remain somewhat optimistic about Chevron's prospects for 2014. The target stock price would represent an almost 8% rise from current levels. Combined with a solid dividend yield above 3%, reaching those levels would give investors a strong double-digit percentage return for 2014.
Producers throughout the industry have had to deal with weak prices during 2013, and early calls are for those price declines to continue next year as well. Several influential analysts expect another $10 per barrel drop in oil prices during 2014. Even though some of those estimates were made before the most recent data on industrial production and GDP growth came out, it's unclear whether rising energy demand can completely offset the supply overhang that exists in many key markets.
Chevron's international expansion will inevitably play a key role in its success, but working abroad has its own complications. Earlier this month, Chevron said it would delay a Chinese gas project over a disagreement with partner PetroChina on the best method for developing the project. Around the world, oil producers are turning to Chevron, Exxon, and other experts in unconventional drilling methods, seeking their expertise both to develop existing prospects and to gain the experience to take on future projects without further assistance. That dynamic puts Chevron and its peers in a tough position of having to defend their intellectual property while still working productively with partners. Meanwhile, controversy over hydraulic fracturing has caused tension in many areas, with protests in the eastern European nation of Romania leading to equipment damage and temporary operational halts there.
Chevron also has some company-specific challenges of its own. Looming over its head is a potential $9.5 billion judgment related to environmental damage in Ecuador, the liability for which Chevron assumed in its takeover of Texaco more than a decade ago. The recent decision by a Canadian court that could expose Chevron's oil-sands assets to that judgment is just the latest wrinkle in what could be a complicated legal battle throughout 2014 and beyond. At the same time, cost overruns on its Gorgon liquefied natural gas project in Australia have raised concerns about the economic viability of using LNG production and transport to get natural gas from lucrative plays off the Australian coast to energy-hungry users in China, India, and key Southeast Asian markets.
Finally, in downstream operations, Chevron and Exxon have chosen not to follow ConocoPhillips and others that have spun off their refining and chemical operations in favor of remaining vertically integrated. Chevron actually just brought on Jon Huntsman Jr. as a board member, potentially signaling an even greater move toward the downstream side of its business given Huntsman's experience in the chemical-manufacturing industry. With spreads between domestic and global crude oil prices having widened again recently, Chevron's prospects in refining and chemical manufacturing have a lot of promise, and that's a big reason why the company has partnered with Phillips 66 on a large-scale ethane-cracking facility that represents a substantial part of Chevron's overall capital budget.
Chevron's 2014 performance will come in large part from factors beyond its control, including market prices for oil, natural gas, and refined products like gasoline and diesel fuel. Yet with ambitious plans to keep expanding production capacity while also making it easier to bring those products to markets where demand is high, Chevron hopes to buck any negative trend in energy prices and take full advantage of all the opportunities in the industry in 2014 and beyond.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Click here to add Chevron to My Watchlist, which can find all of our Foolish analysis on it and all your other stocks.
