IMAGE SOURCE: THE MOTLEY FOOL.
ExxonMobil Corporation (NYSE:XOM)
Q2 2018 Earnings Conference Call
July 27, 2018, 9:30 a.m. ET
Operator
Good day, everyone. Welcome to the ExxonMobil Corporation's Second Quarter 2018 Earnings Call. Today's call is being recorded. At this time, I'd like to turn the call over to the Vice President of Investor Relations and Secretary, Mr. Neil Hansen. Please go ahead, sir.
Neil Hansen -- Vice President of Investor Relations and Secretary
Thank you and good morning. Welcome to ExxonMobil's Second Quarter Earnings Call. By way of introduction, my name is Neil Hansen. I assumed the role of Vice President of Investor Relations on July 1st. I look forward to interacting with each of you and discussing ExxonMobil's performance and long-term value proposition. That will include ongoing efforts to improve transparency and increase engagement, which will continue with the call today.
As you saw with the earnings release this morning, and as we will discuss during the call, the second-quarter results were well below market expectations. We will review some of the factors that resulted in that deviation. Although challenging in some regards, it was also a quarter highlighted by significant progress on key near-term priorities along with a number of notable milestones related to strategic investments across the upstream, downstream, and chemical business lines. These investments underpin our plans to increase long-term earnings potential and shareholder value, as we outlined at the analyst meeting in March in New York.

10 stocks we like better than Exxon Mobil Corporation
When investing geniuses David and Tom Gardner have a stock tip, it can pay to listen. After all, the newsletter they have run for over a decade, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has tripled the market.*
David and Tom just revealed what they believe are the ten best stocks for investors to buy right now¡¦ and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them! That's right -- they think these 10 stocks are even better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021

As we previously announced, part of our commitment to increase engagement is participation in earnings calls by members of our management committee, including participation by our Chairman, Darren Woods, for the fourth-quarter and full-year earnings review. Joining me on the call today is Neil Chapman, Senior Vice President of ExxonMobil. Neil oversees ExxonMobil's upstream business. After I complete a review of the quarterly financial and operating performance, Neil will provide his perspectives on the significant progress we made during the quarter and investments that will create long-term shareholder value. Neil and I will be happy to take your questions following a few prepared remarks.
Our comments this morning will reference the slides available on the Investor section of our website. I would also like to draw your attention to the cautionary statement on Slide 2 and the supplemental information at the end of the presentation. I will now move to Slide 3 and start by summarizing a number of developments that influenced second-quarter performance, specifically as it compares to what we experienced during the first three months of this year.
The Upstream benefited from the higher liquids prices experienced during the quarter. The increase in our average liquids realizations was generally consistent with the change in markers, including a $7.60 increase in Brent and a $5.10 increase in WTI. Upstream production in the quarter was impacted by seasonally lower gas demand in Europe and scheduled maintenance, which was undertaken to support operational integrity. A 25% growth in tight oil production in the Permian and Bakken relative to the first quarter provided an uplift to volumes as we ramped up drilling activities and secured logistics capabilities in an area that will continue to see tremendous volumes growth. We also achieved a number of significant milestones on long-term growth plans in Guyana, Brazil, and Mozambique, which Neil Chapman will discuss in detail later on the call this morning.
In the Downstream, seasonal increases in demand and higher levels of industry maintenance resulted in stronger industry refining margins in North America and Europe. A widening Brent/WTI Midland spread, with Permian production outpacing logistics capacity, also helped to strengthen refining margins in North America. We safely and successfully carried out a significant level of scheduled maintenance during the quarter to improve operations and strengthen our refining network, partly in preparation for the upcoming changes to the International Maritime Organization standards related to the maximum levels of sulfur in marine fuels, which will go into effect in the year 2020.
Scheduled maintenance had a significant impact on second-quarter refining throughput and associated expenses. The strengthening of the U.S. dollar relative to the euro and British pound resulted in unfavorable foreign exchange impacts. In line with our long-term strategy to grow higher-value products, sales of retail fuels and lubricants increased during the quarter. In addition, we expanded our presence in key growth markets like China, Indonesia, and Mexico. We also made significant progress on strategic projects in Beaumont, Antwerp, and Rotterdam to increase the production of higher-value products, including premium ultra-low-sulfur fuels and Group 2 premium lubricant base stocks.
While long-term demand fundamentals remain strong in the Chemical business, we experienced weaker margins in the quarter as improved realizations were more than offset by higher fees and energy comps. On the other hand, the successful completion of strategic growth projects contributed to higher sales.
Slide 4 provides an overview of earnings for the second quarter. ExxonMobil's second-quarter earnings were approximately $4 billion or $0.92 per share, up 18% from the prior-year quarter. The growth in earnings compared to the second quarter of 2017 was primarily driven by the upstream, moderated by a 50% decline in downstream earnings. Earnings declined by 15% from the first quarter of this year, with lower contributions from all three business lines. I will start the more detailed review of our second-quarter results with reconciliations of the financial and operating performance for each of the business lines relative to the first quarter of 2018, and starting first with the Upstream on Slide 5.
Second-quarter 2018 Upstream earnings were $3 billion, a $457 million decrease from the first quarter. Crude realizations rose nearly $8.00 per barrel, or 13% versus the first quarter, while gas realizations were down slightly. Lower seasonal gas demand in Europe contributed significantly to a $180 million negative impact on earnings compared to the first quarter. Downtime, representing the impact on earnings from both lower volumes and increased maintenance spend, reduced earnings by $210 million, largely driven by scheduled maintenance in Canada. Other items, including higher exploration and production expenses, decreased earnings by $190 million. Finally, the absence of the first-quarter gain on the Scarborough asset sale contributed to a reduction in earnings of $420 million.
Moving to Slide 6 and a comparison of second-quarter Upstream production to the first quarter of this year, oil equivalent production in the quarter was 3.6 million barrels per day. Liquids production was essentially flat versus the prior quarter while natural gas was down 14% or 238,000 oil equivalent barrels per day. Increased downtime, mostly related to scheduled maintenance in Canada at Kearl, Cold Lake, and Syncrude, negatively impacted production in the quarter. Lower seasonal demand in Europe accounted for approximately 85% of the change in volumes compared to the first quarter. Liquids growth in the quarter included a continued increase in unconventional Permian and Bakken production and the ongoing ramp-up of Hebron volumes, which more than offset natural field decline.
Moving to Slide 7 and a comparison of second-quarter Upstream earnings to the second quarter of the prior year, second-quarter 2018 upstream earnings increased by $1.9 billion from the prior-year quarter. Higher prices increased earnings by $2.4 billion, driven by a $22.00-per-barrel or $0.49 improvement in ExxonMobil's crude realizations, which was consistent with the change in markers. Lower volumes reduced earnings by $120 million, with unfavorable entitlement effects from the higher prices partially offsetting growth.
Downtime relative to the prior-year quarter decreased earnings by $230 million, with impacts essentially evenly split between scheduled and unscheduled downtime. Impacts from the earthquake in Papua New Guinea was the largest single contributor to the losses from unscheduled downtime. Production in PNG reached full capacity in April following the earthquake in the first quarter and is now consistently operating above original design capacity. All other items decreased earnings by $170 million, largely due to higher production expenses and increased exploration activity, primarily in Brazil.
Moving now to Slide 8 and a comparison of second-quarter volumes relative to the same period as last year, oil equivalent production in the quarter was 3.6 million barrels per day, representing a quarter-over-quarter decline of 275,000 oil equivalent barrels per day, with liquids down 3% and natural gas down 13%. Lower entitlements resulting from higher prices reduced volumes, as did continued efforts to high-grade our portfolio, with the largest impact versus last year coming from the divestment of our operated assets in Norway. Increased downtime, primarily for scheduled maintenance, also reduced volumes in the quarter, with the most significant impact coming in Canada at Syncrude, Cold Lake, and Kearl.
The decline we experienced in the quarter was in line with our general expectation that base volumes will reduce by 3% each year. However, the more pronounced impact of the decline on gas production in part represents an intentional near-term effort to focus growth on higher-value production. Thus, we saw a decrease of approximately 12% in U.S. unconventional gas volumes, reflecting minimal investment. This shift to value is also evident in the growth we saw in liquids, which more than offset decline in mature assets as production in the Permian and Bakken increased compared to the same quarter as last year and production from Hebron continued to ramp up.
Moving now to Slide 9, I will review Downstream financial and operating results, starting first with a comparison of second-quarter performance with the first quarter of 2018. Downstream earnings for the quarter were $724 million, a decline of $260 million compared to the first quarter. Refining margins strengthened in North America and Europe, driven by seasonal demand, higher industry maintenance, and for North America, a widening Brent/WTI differential contributing $630 million to earnings relative to the first quarter of the year.
An increase in higher-value sales contributed a positive $50 million, including an increase in retail fuel sales, with additional sites in the U.S., Belgium, Netherlands, and Luxembourg, and record quarterly Mobil 1 sales in the U.S. and China. Major planned turnaround activities at SAMREF, Gravenchon, Baytown, Strathcona, and Beaumont significantly impacted second-quarter results, largely driving the $620 million decline in earnings relative to the first three months of the year. This includes the impact on throughput and related maintenance expenses. Depreciation in the euro and British pound relative to the U.S. dollar negatively impacted earnings by $210 million.
Moving now to Slide 10 and a comparison of current-quarter Downstream earnings relative to the second quarter of the prior year, Downstream earnings for the quarter were down $661 million compared to the second quarter of 2017. Stronger refining margins in North America contributed to a $260 million increase in earnings, as we were able to successfully capture the benefit of widening regional crude differentials, primarily West Canadian and Permian. Growth in higher-value sales of retail fuels -- again, driven by an increase in the retail network in the U.S., Belgium, Netherlands, and Luxembourg -- combined with record quarterly sales of our flagship Mobil 1 lubricants in the U.S. and China resulted in a $100 million benefit to earnings relative to the prior-year quarter.
Downtime, including both volume and expense factors, resulted in a $620 million negative impact in quarter-over-quarter earnings. This included approximation $375 million from scheduled maintenance activities in Europe, North America, and the Middle East to support operational integrity and to strengthen our global capabilities in advance of the change of IMO marine fuel standards. Planned turnaround activities were successfully completed in SAMREF, Gravenchon, Baytown, Strathcona, and Beaumont.
A majority of the losses from unplanned downtime were carried over from events that occurred in the first quarter, impacting earnings by approximately $245 million compared to the prior-year quarter. These reliability incidents were obviously disappointing. However, repairs are now essentially complete and we are returning to full production. Significantly improved reliability is expected in the third quarter. A depreciation in the euro and British pound relative to the U.S. dollar negatively impacted earnings by $240 million. The absence of asset sale gains, mainly related to the sale of our Downstream Nigeria assets and retail assets in the U.K. and Italy in the second quarter of last year, led to a relative decrease in the current-year earnings of $130 million.
Moving now to Chemical financial and operating results on Slide 11 and starting with a comparison of the current-year quarter with the first quarter of 2018, second-quarter Chemical earnings were $890 million, a $120 million decrease from the prior quarter. Weaker margins negatively impacted earnings by $90 million as higher feed and energy costs outpaced stronger realizations. Earnings increased by $50 million compared to the first three months of the year as new assets in Singapore and the U.S., combined with the absence of the Yanpet turnaround, increased sales volumes. A depreciation in the euro relative to the U.S. dollar negatively impacted earnings by $50 million.
Turning now to Slide 12 and a review of the $95 million decline in the current-quarter earnings relative to the second quarter of 2017, weaker margins resulted in a decrease of $210 million as higher feed and energy costs outpaced stronger realizations. Higher product sales improved earnings by $120 million and resulted from the start-up of the Mont Belvieu polyethylene expansion and the addition of volumes from the Jurong Aromatics acquisition in Singapore combined with stronger demand.
Moving now to Slide 13, which provides an overview of key second-quarter financial results, cash flow from operations and asset sales was $8.1 billion, including $300 million in proceeds from asset sales. Second-quarter CapEx was $6.6 billion, reflecting continued investments to support long-term growth plans, including the acquisition of additional interest in the BM-S-8 block in Brazil and the purchase of PT Federal Karyatama, one of Indonesia's largest manufacturers and marketers of motorcycle lubricants. Free cash flow after investments was $2.7 billion. We distributed $3.5 billion in dividends to our shareholders during the quarter, reflecting a 6.5% increase from the first quarter. Debt into the quarter at $41.2 billion, a slight increase compared to the first quarter, while cash declined slightly to $3.4 billion.
Moving to Slide 14 and a review of 2018's sources and uses of cash, first-half earnings adjusted for depreciation expense and changes in working capital combined with the proceeds of our ongoing asset sales program yielded $18 billion in cash flow from operations and asset sales. In line with our capital allocation strategy, cash flow from operations and asset sales fully funded first-half investments and shareholder distributions while also allowing for a reduction in debt, further strengthening our industry-leading financial flexibility. PP&E ads and investments and advances of $5.4 billion in the second quarter were slightly above the first-half trend -- again, primarily due to discrete outlays in the quarter related to the acquisition of the additional offshore interest in Brazil and the previously mentioned lubricants acquisition in Indonesia.
Shareholder distributions of $3.5 billion in the second quarter reflect the 6.5% increase in the dividend. Finally, the negative change in working capital seen in the first half of the year was driven primarily by inventory build due to the planned maintenance activities and the use of longer-haul crudes as we leverage our integrated business to take advantage of favorable economics by exporting WTI-linked crudes to our refining networks in Europe and Asia. At this time, I would like to hand the call over to Neil Chapman, Senior Vice President of ExxonMobil, to provide some perspective on second-quarter performance and the progress we've made toward the long-term growth strategy we outlined in the 2018 Analyst Meeting.
Neil Chapman -- Senior Vice President
Good morning, everybody. Thanks for joining the call. The No. 1 Neil has provided the details, but I think it will be useful before I get into the progress versus our objectives that we laid out in March to put my perspective on what you just heard from Neil. This quarter was a low point in terms of volumes in the Upstream and Downstream. Absent of some unknown or extraordinary event, volumes will steadily increase through the second half of the year.
In the Upstream, there are two messages. First, lower volumes in the second quarter versus the first quarter were due to the seasonality of our gas business, which I think you all understand is primarily in Europe. That reduction was fully anticipated and was consistent with prior year's quarter-to-quarter variation. At our Investor/Analyst Meeting in March, I said we anticipate our Upstream volumes this year will be roughly in line with 2017. Of course, that was -- as I said at the time -- absent of price and divestment impact. Year to date, we've indeed seen an impact from price and from divestments that on a full-year basis is the major driver for reduction of our production forecast.
When you combine this with the smaller impacts of unplanned downtime that we experienced in the first half -- of course, with the Papua New Guinea earthquake being a significant part of that -- and the ongoing work to reduce our exposure to the lowest-value U.S. gas business, we anticipate 2018 average volume will be around 3.8 million oil equivalent barrels per day. Of course, again, that assumes no change in the current prices and no further divestments that impact volumes.
Going back to reducing our exposure to the U.S. gas business, you saw the impact in Neil's discussion of volumes, but it did not have a material impact on earnings. As I've commented previously, all volumes are not equal. There is a range of profitability on the volumes we produce. Our focus is on value, so we will continue to upgrade our mix and strengthen our portfolio. In other words, there's no structural change in the upstream business from the perspective that I provided to all of you in March.
A couple of comments on the Downstream business: In our Downstream and Refining business, as you have heard, we had a heavy turnaround in scheduled maintenance in the quarter. The cost and loss of sales from these scheduled outages was large and clearly had the most significant impact on the Downstream earnings. These were planned; they were fully anticipated.
However, as you know, in the first quarter, we had significant losses due to reliability incidents in the Downstream. Unfortunately, the impact of these continued into the second quarter. We're not happy about it. We're all over it in terms of getting back to our expected reliability performance. We thoroughly investigated. There's nothing systemic in these incidents. As of this month, these incidents that originated in the first quarter and carried through into the second quarter -- they are behind us. Like the Upstream, there's no structural change in our Downstream business. We are on plan in terms of our strategy and the growth plans that we laid out in March. I will provide some details on that in the coming slides, and my focus, of course, will be on the Upstream.
So, to begin with a reminder of the five Upstream developments that I outlined at that time, these are key to our midterm growth plans. Our deep-water projects in Guyana and Brazil -- which, as I said in March, carry significant upside potential -- the transformational opportunity that we have in U.S. unconventional liquids, and of course, that's led by our very strong position in the Permian, and our low-cost LNG opportunities in both Papua New Guinea and Mozambique that we believe will play a key role in capturing the strong growing market demand.
These key growth opportunities reflect the strongest portfolio ExxonMobil have had since the merger of our two companies in 1999. They are attractive across a range of prices. They will all begin to produce in the near-to-mid-term and contribute to our strongly growing Upstream earnings.
Let me start with some comments on what I regard as really excellent progress we're making in the Staebroek block offshore Guyana. Estimated gross resources for the block pending assessment of the latest discoveries is now more than 4 billion oil equivalent barrels, and that's up from the 3.2 billion that I communicated in March, just four months ago. We made the eighth discovery on the block with the Longtail exploration well, which encountered over 256 feet of high-quality oil-bearing sandstone, and establishes the Turbot area as a potential hub of over 500 million oil equivalent barrels recoverable.
We're currently making plans to have a second exploration vessel offshore Guyana, bringing our total number of drill ships on the Staebroek block to three. The new vessel is planned to operate in parallel to the Stena Carron to explore the block's numerous high-value additional prospects. The collective discoveries on the block to date have established the potential for now up to five FPSOs producing over 750,000 barrels per day by 2025, the potential for additional production from a significant number of undrilled targets, and plans for rapid exploration and appraisal drilling. You may remember in the March meeting, I was outlining that we have three FPSOs in our plan, and we were looking at a production level of 500,000 barrels per day, so it's a significant increase.
With our ongoing exploration success, we also see an increasing development pace and the potential for increased scope. The Liza-1 Phase 1 project is progressing very well. Pre-drilling of the development well started in May with the Noble Bob Douglas rig. We have batch drilling wells for maximum efficiency and we've completed the top hull sections on six wells to date and are now working through the intermediate hull sections.
Conversion work on the FPSO Liza Destiny -- in Singapore, of course -- is progressing well. We remain on track for first oil early in 2020. Liza Phase 2 will be larger -- 220,000 barrels per day FPSO. In June, we submitted the draft environmental impact assessment and the development plan for the government's approval. We're targeting start-up of that FPSO in 2022.
The Liza-5 well successfully tested the northern portion of the field, and, along with the giant Payara field, will support a third phase of development in Guyana. Payara development will target FID in 2019 and will use an FPSO designed to produce -- at this stage, we see approximately 180,000 barrels of oil per day as early as 2023. The updated production profile reflects this increased pace of development from what I shared with you in March.
We have a strong focus on partnering with the Guyanese and enabling local workforce and supplier development to support this growth and the success of Guyana's new energy industry. About 50% of ExxonMobil's employees, contractors, and subcontractors are Guyanese, a number that will continue to grow as operations progress. ExxonMobil spent about $24 million with more than 300 local suppliers in 2017, and we've opened the Center for Local Business Development in Georgetown to promote the establishment and growth of small and medium-sized local businesses.
Let me turn to Brazil. Offshore Brazil, we completed the purchase of interest in BM-S-8, containing part of the greater than 2-billion-barrel pre-salt Carcara field, where development planning activities are rapidly progressing. This high-quality development has better than a 10% return at $40.00 a barrel Brent. With current drilling in BM-S-8, the Guanxuma well has encountered oil. The preliminary results are very encouraging, and of course, further analysis of this well data is ongoing with our partners on the block, Equinor, Petrogal, and Bara.
In bid round 15, we were awarded eight deep-water blocks across the Santos, Campos, and, Potiguar basins, with exploration activity progressing. And, in the fourth pre-salt bid round, we were awarded the Uirapuru exploration block. This is important for us. This block is adjacent to Carcara and we believe offers potential development and production synergies as we move forward. So, that leads to our total acreage build offshore Brazil now being 25 blocks, a significant change from what we described in March. We are actively maturing drill well planning for multiple additional wells in the next two years.
Looking at the U.S., we continue to grow our unconventional liquids. Our total net production of liquids unconventional in the U.S. is up 30% year on year. In the Permian, we bought over 50 new wells to sales in the quarter, resulting in second-quarter Permian production up 45% in the first quarter this year. We now have 34 active operating rigs in the Permian, 17 in the Midland, 17 in the Delaware, and six active rigs in the Bakken.
On the completion side, we have 11 active completion and fracking crews in both basins in the Permian and three in the Bakken. We're actively expanding the Wink terminal -- this is the terminal, of course, that we acquired in late 2017 to accommodate more throughput. We've executed multiple contracts that will enhance pipeline capacity from the Permian to the Gulf Coast. We have more than secured liquids evacuation capacity to support growth through 2022 and our Gulf Coast refineries are already processing our production levels and more, capturing the benefits of this advantage feed cost.
Additionally, we signed a letter of intent, and it was announced in June, with plans to develop a one-million-barrel-per-day long-haul crude transport system that will connect the Delaware production to our world-class refining and chemical assets on the Gulf Coast. Finally, we've secured offtake for associated gas through 2020 and are in active negotiations for additional capacity. We have no concerns about evacuation capacity, both in gas and liquids, for our Permian business.
In liquified natural gas, we continue to make great progress in Mozambique. The Coral floating LNG project is progressing on schedule and the fabrication of the hull is expected to start in the third quarter of this year. For the first phase of the integrated onshore development, the co-venturers have now aligned on two large LNG trains, which will each produce 7.6 million tons of LNG per year. Earlier this month, we announced the development plan for the first phase has been submitted.
ExxonMobil will lead the construction and operation of the onshore liquefaction on behalf of the joint venture, and our partner, Eni, will lead the construction and operation of the upstream facilities. We're targeting final investment decision in 2019 with the first LNG expected to be online consistent with what I communicated in March in 2024.
In Papua New Guinea, the recovery from the devastating earthquake continues. As you all know, our facilities stood the event extremely well and operations have now returned to full capacity. The epicenter of this earthquake was right adjacent to our facilities up in the highlands, but our plant is already consistently operating at more than 20% above the original design capacity. We believe this forms a solid foundation to progress our expansions. Our expansion programs continue on plan. We're aligning on a three-train, eight-million-ton expansion, with one train dedicated to gas from the P'nyang and PNG LNG fields and two dedicated to gas associated with the Papua LNG project.
So, finally, I'd like to briefly mention a number of other highlights across the businesses that really underscore our progress on pursuing the growth plans that we outlined in March. In the Upstream, we've captured some additional key exploration acreage -- offshore Pakistan, where we signed an agreement to acquire 25% interest in Block G, and in Namibia, we completed a farming agreement to acquire a 40% interest in the PL-82 license. Improvements are on track at our large mining operation at Kearl. We anticipate producing 200,000 barrels per day this year, as I communicated at the Analyst Meeting, and of course, that's up 10% from 2017.
In the quarter, we reached ahead to an agreement with the government and our co-venture partner Shell on amended fiscals and production outlook on our gas venture in Groningen, Holland. Qatar Petroleum farmed into our Argentina unconventional development with an agreement to purchase 30% of the equity. Consistent with our focused shift toward U.S. liquids on the unconventional space, we divested some of our U.S. Rockies gas assets in the quarter, representing around about 20,000 barrels per day oil equivalent of gas production.
As Neil mentioned, in the lubes business, we purchased FKT. That's a leading Indonesian distributor of lubricants and it's included a new 700-kb lube oil blend plant for blending and packaging of our products. In the fuels business, in the quarter, we reached agreements with Sonatrach for the sale of the 200-kb/d Augusta refinery and the three associated fuels terminals.
In Chemicals, we announced yesterday that we've begun the operations of our 1.5-million-ton ethane cracker at Baytown. Of course, the associated 1.3 million tons of polyethylene facilities, which are on the other side of Houston at Mont Belvieu, are already in operation. They've been operating on purchased ethylene and are operating at full rates -- in other words, at capacity. The cracker start-up will enable us to back out these ethylene purchases and replace it with our own ethylene volume.
In May, we announced the creation of a new joint venture with SABIC for a 1.8-million-ton ethane cracker with associated derivatives in polyethylene and glycol. The plan is that this will be located in south Texas, near Corpus Christi and close to the Permian Basin. Finally, we've completed the start-up of our 230,000-ton Singapore Specialties in the Chemical business, with production fully online. This contains the world's largest adhesive tackifier unit and a world-scale halobutyl plant. So, that's the comments. Neil, I'll hand it back to you, and we'll get into some Q&A.
Neil Hansen -- Vice President of Investor Relations and Secretary
Thank you, Neil. Neil and I will be happy to take any questions that you might have.
Operator
Thank you, Mr. Hansen and Mr. Chapman. The question and answer session will be conducted electronically. If you'd like to ask a question, please do so by pressing *1 on your touchtone telephone. We request that you limit your questions to one initial and one follow-up so that we may take as many questions as possible. If you're using a speakerphone, please make sure your mute function is turned off to allow your signal to reach our equipment. Additionally, please lift your handset before asking your question. We'll proceed in the order that you signal us and we'll take as many questions as time permits. Once again, please press *1 on your touchtone telephone to ask a question. We'll take our first question from Biraj Borkhataria with the Royal Bank of Canada.
Biraj Borkhataria -- RBC Capital Markets -- Director
Hi. Thanks for taking my question. Neil, best of luck in your new role, and to the other Neil, thank you for joining the call. So, my first question was on the Downstream. So, it does look like you were impacted quite heavily for some unplanned downtime. Hopefully, that's behind you, but could you just talk about the maintenance plans for the rest of 2018, whether there's anything significant in either Chemicals or Refining that we should be aware of? And, I've got a follow-up on U.S. gas.
Neil Hansen -- Vice President of Investor Relations and Secretary
Thank you, Biraj. Good morning and thank you for joining the call, and I look forward to interacting with you and talking more about ExxonMobil and our value proposition. So, your question on maintenance -- the one thing we can say is that we do expect maintenance during 2018 and 2019 to be a bit heavier than normal. Within that, you would expect to see some seasonality -- so, a bit heavier in the second quarter, coming down a little bit in the third quarter. It's difficult for us to get into specific mention of specific activities at sites, but we can say that given the IMO 2020 change, other maintenance activity that we plan to do over this year and next year will result in a bit heavier activity, and then you'll see some seasonality in that. Neil, I don't know if you wanted to add anything.
Neil Chapman -- Senior Vice President
I'd just say that I think I mentioned in my comments that we were at a low point in terms of volume in the second quarter, so, with that, you'd anticipate the volumes increasing, but it'll be a moderate increase, and we still have a heavy turnaround schedule in the third quarter, not quite as large as the second quarter.
Biraj Borkhataria -- RBC Capital Markets -- Director
Great, that's very helpful. So, to follow up on U.S. gas and some of your comments there, my question was really on timing. You talked about releasing your exposure to lower-value business, but the gas market's been well supplied for a number of years now, so I was wondering what drove the decision this year to spend less. Is it just the fact that you're bringing other things into the portfolio? What's going on there?
Neil Chapman -- Senior Vice President
This is an extraction/depletion business, as we all know, and as wells start to deplete, you have choices on whether you want to drill more in gas or whether you want to drill more in liquids, and we believe we have this very strong advantage position in the Permian, of course. This goes back to the Bass acquisition that we made a couple of years ago. I've mentioned many times since then that we've just seen continuous upside on that liquids opportunity in the Permian Basin. So, we have choices to make, and we have priority calls, and what we are doing is we're prioritizing liquids production over gas production.
Now, when we are progressing our developments in the Permian Basin, it's really important to us that we do this in the most capital-efficient way, which typically will mean drilling a lot of wells on a drill pad, and then we drill several at a time, and then we come in and we frack them up, and then we start to evacuate the gas. What that results in -- it doesn't result in a steady increase in volume. It's a little bit lumpy. Some quarters, we get a big increase in volumes.
Of course, we had a 45% increase in the second quarter versus the first quarter in the Permian, but sometimes, it's less so, and you're going to see that. What we're seeing in the first half of the year as we start to focus on liquids and, I would say deemphasize somewhat -- and, I must say, "somewhat" is not completely our gas business -- we've seen a lower amount of gas production in the second quarter first half of the year, and that will be replaced and replaced by some more with liquids in the coming period.
Biraj Borkhataria -- RBC Capital Markets -- Director
Thank you. That was very helpful.
Operator
Next, we'll go to Doug Terreson with Evercore ISI.
Douglas Terreson -- Evercore ISI -- Managing Director
Good morning, guys. My topic is performance improvement in the Upstream, meaning while it seems like whether because of a higher-quality set of opportunities and improvement in process that the outlook for returns in Exxon's five key areas of investment is pretty positive, and I think y'all made that case. Simultaneously, normalized returns on capital in the NP business declined significantly during the past decade or so, and it seems like there may be opportunities to create value through divestments too.
So, my question is with your competitors divesting tens of billions of dollars of assets and either moving on to more productive areas or returning funds to shareholders through repurchases, often to their benefit, is there a philosophical reason why ExxonMobil hasn't been more assertive in this area, or would you say stay tuned? So, the question is about how you think about value creation opportunities from underperforming parts of the portfolio.
Neil Chapman -- Senior Vice President
Thanks for the question. You probably answered some of it in your question, actually. You were referencing back to a comment that I made in March, I've no doubt, where I sort of indicated -- and, I didn't say it exactly this way, but it was sort of along the lines of "Watch this space." What I really mean about that is we have some really strong value-accretive opportunities, and I commented at the time and I stand by this that they are the most advantaged perspective -- the best set of opportunities we've had since the merger in the five. I just talked about the progress and I outlined them at the Investor/Analyst Call.
Now, when you have a portfolio in the Upstream, it's really important you don't just add. You look at the area, look at the businesses and the assets which don't deliver the same amount of value, and I indicated at the time we are looking very hard at that, and that is indeed the case. There is certainly no philosophical intent to hang on to assets that are underperforming -- far from it, Doug.
I can tell you that we are very actively looking at our portfolio, we are actively managing both ends of the portfolio, and I would add to that to tell you that yes, I really believe strongly that we have five great, great assets that we're progressing -- these big development opportunities -- but I'm telling you, if something else better comes along, we're going to progress that as well. At the same time, we're actively managing the other side of our portfolio, and it's a focus that we've had in this company now for the last -- for a long time, but even more focus, I would say, in the last 18 months, and certainly, in the last six months. So, I'm not wanting to lead that we have anything coming immediately, but we're looking, and we're very active.
Douglas Terreson -- Evercore ISI -- Managing Director
Okay, thanks a lot, Neil.
Operator
Next question comes from the line of Doug Leggate with Bank of America Merrill Lynch.
Douglas Leggate -- Bank of America Merrill Lynch -- Managing Director
Thank you. Good morning, everyone, and let me also welcome one Neil -- both Neils, actually -- and the second Neil for getting on the call this quarter. Guys, I wonder if I can just start with a comment, and then I've got two questions. My comment is the market, looking at the numbers, clearly didn't expect the downtime. You guys obviously did. It would be extremely helpful if you could find some way of signaling to us that these planned events are in your plan for the year to avoid the kind of volatility that we have quarter to quarter in your share price. So, maybe something to think about.
My two questions are first of all, I'll follow up to Doug Terreson's question on disposals, but Neil Chapman, I'd like to get very specific, if I may. There's been a lot of chatter from Qatar Petroleum about sanctioning the Golden Pass project and moving upstream and vertical integration into onshore gas. So, my question -- to the extent you're able to answer it -- is is the Golden Pass sanction in your plans as it stood at the Analyst Day, and could you envisage partnering yourself upstream on your onshore gas production with Qatar Petroleum?
Neil Chapman -- Senior Vice President
Thanks, Doug. Let me just make a comment on the downtime and the scheduled maintenance on refineries. I think it's a very valid point that you make, and of course, we're taking that into account. Darren Woods talked about our drive toward increased transparency, and that's really our intent, so we take your comment, and we will be looking at it.
In terms of Golden Pass, Doug, we're never going to say exactly when we're going to FID a project. It's very clear that we're actively involved with our partner QP on that project. The place we're at right now is we've got some initial bids in. We are working those bids and working the opportunity. We will work that opportunity with our partner, including the upstream part of that business. There is an obvious opportunity in that space.
I would tell you that we see the demand for liquefied natural gas continuing to grow. We see that the major buyers around the world increasingly look for diversity of supply, and so, that's a good opportunity for the U.S. gas business. That's one of the drivers in our Golden Pass project. The other driver is -- of course, we have a lot of assets already in place now, so we can leverage that. We think it can bring us an advantaged opportunity together. I know you want a specific answer on when we will FID; I can't give you one. All I can tell you is we're actively working the project with our partner, and as soon as we're ready to FID, we'll let the market know.
Douglas Leggate -- Bank of America Merrill Lynch -- Managing Director
Thanks for that, Neil. I was actually pressing a bit more on your potential to sell gas assets to QP, but I'll move on. My second question, if I may, is really more of a production growth question as it relates to the guidance you gave us back in March. You're now at 34 rigs in the Permian, and that appears to be ahead of your schedule, and Guyana is substantially larger, it seems, than what you provided to us in your guidance in March. So, I just wonder if you could talk to what's happening in terms of the momentum and potentially the scale, and if I can risk an add-on, maybe an update as to how much of Ranger you've actually included in your resource estimate at this point, and I'll leave it there. Thanks.
Neil Chapman -- Senior Vice President
Thanks, Doug, and thanks for the questions. I'll say what I've said before. I said in my comments in March that we're not focused on volume, we're focused on value. What's really important to me is not the volume outlook for this business, it's the value. Not all volumes -- as it's clearly obvious -- are created equally. Having said that, what I was trying to indicate in my remarks a few minutes ago, both in the Permian and in offshore Guyana, is we have seen considerable upside in a short space of time. It's only three months, four months, since I was up there describing both those opportunities to you.
Yes, we are further ahead in terms of drill rigs than we had said at that time, and yes, we have had more discoveries in Guyana that we said at that time. We're going to develop them at the pace that we think is the best in terms of capital efficiency and the best in terms of value. I would tell you that we're not giving any different update in terms of our outlook right now in terms of the total versus what we said in March, but I do want to indicate -- and, it's clearly obvious from my comments earlier on -- that we've seen considerable upside versus what I talked about in March.
Going back to Guyana and Ranger, we have some more appraisal wells to go in Ranger. We know, of course, from our discovery that we have a considerable resource. We're not in a position where we can quantify that right now.
Douglas Leggate -- Bank of America Merrill Lynch -- Managing Director
Thanks, guys.
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Jon Rigby with UBS.
Jonathan Rigby -- UBS Investment Bank -- Managing Director
