Although we don't believe in timing the market or panicking over daily movements, we do like to keep an eye on market changes -- just in case they're material to our investing thesis.
Stocks bounced today with the Federal Reserve's two-day Open Market Committee on tap for this week, kicking off tomorrow. Productivity growth in the third quarter reached its fastest pace In four years, climbing to 3%, up from 1.9% in the first estimate, as worker output moved up 4.7%. Economic reports have been robust nearly across the board over the last two months as the country as added 200,000 jobs in each of the last two months. Riding those hopes of an economic recovery, the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI) jumped 129 points, or 0.8%, while the S&P 500 improved 0.6%.
ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) led the Dow out of the gate as the oil giant got an upgrade from Goldman Sachs (NYSE: GS). Goldman lifted its rating on the world's biggest energy company to buy, giving it a price target of $109. Analyst Arjun Murti noted a potential increase in oil and gas production. Oil production did seem to bottom out finally in its previous quarter, as Exxon reported an increase in oil production after nine straight quarterly declines. Still, the "easy oil" in the world is getting harder to find, cars are becoming more efficient, and natural gas and renewable energy is growing much faster. Exxon finished up 2% on the day.
Elsewhere, Herbalife (NYSE:HLF) shares shot up 9.4% after a reaudit found no material changes at the multilevel marketing company. Herbalife had come under controversy after hedge fund manager Bill Ackman accused the company of being a "pyramid scheme" a year ago. The finding seems to put to rest any concerns about Herbalife, which had stemmed from Ackman's accusations. Herbalife shares have more than tripled this year as they've recovered from Ackman's blistering short presentation a year ago.
Finally, Sprint (NYSE:S) said it was considering a merger with T-Mobile (NASDAQ:TMUS), though analysts seem to think regulators would put the kibosh on a proposed merger, much like it did with AT&T's earlier attempt to take over T-Mobile. T-Mobile ended the day down 4.5% while Sprint dropped 1.4%.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


In this video from Monday's Investor Beat, host Chris Hill and Motley Fool analysts Jason Moser and Tim Hanson dissect the hardest-hitting investing stories of the day.
Google has just bought engineering and robotics company Boston Dynamics, which makes the eighth robotics company Google has acquired in the past six months. This particular company develops animal-like robots, such as a cheetah that is the fastest-running robot in the world and a robot that picks up and throws heavy cinder blocks. What could Google be planning behind the scenes with all this robot tech? In the lead story on today's Investor Beat, Tim and Jason look into Coca-Cola, Amazon, and Google and the future of robots in business.
Then, our analysts take a look at four stocks making moves on Monday's market. Shares of Tiffany hit an all-time high after getting an upgrade from Canaccord Genuity. ExxonMobil also hit a new all-time high on news of an analyst upgrade from Goldman Sachs. TTM Technologies fell today after announcing a proposed offering of $150 million in convertible debt. And Twitter pulled back a bit after downgrades coming from Wells Fargo and SunTrust.
And finally, Jason and Tim pick one stock each that they'll be watching closely in the week ahead. Jason will be taking a look at Amazon's striking worker situation in Germany, while Tim sets his sights on BlackBerry's assets as the company struggles to slim down as well as the value case for BlackBerry stock.



Before you consider Alphabet Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Alphabet Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


In this video from Monday's Investor Beat, host Chris Hill and Motley Fool analysts Jason Moser and Tim Hanson dissect the hardest-hitting investing stories of the day.
Shares of Tiffany (NYSE:TIF) hit an all-time high after getting an upgrade from Canaccord Genuity. ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) also hit a new all-time high on news of an analyst upgrade from Goldman Sachs. TTM Technologies (NASDAQ:TTMI) fell today after announcing a proposed offering of $150 million in convertible debt. And Twitter (NYSE:TWTR) pulled back a bit after downgrades coming from Wells Fargo and SunTrust. In this segment, the guys take a look at four stocks making moves on Monday's market.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Although we don't believe in timing the market or panicking over daily movements, we do like to keep an eye on market changes -- just in case they're material to our investing thesis.
The market has bounced back from last week's slide in a big way to kick off this week, as the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI) jumped out to huge early gains and hasn't looked back. The Dow's up around 150 points at 2:30 p.m. EST, with nearly every member of the blue-chip index in the green. ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) ranks among the Dow's big leaders today in gaining 2.3%, while United Technologies (NYSE:RTX) investors are riding good economic news higher on the stock's own 1.6% climb. Let's check out what you need to know.
Manufacturing hits a big boost
Manufacturing continues to climb higher in the U.S., and a strong report from the sector opened up the day in a big way. November industrial production jumped 1.1%, its biggest single-month climb in a year -- a gain that smashed economist expectations by a full half a percentage point. Mining, one of the hardest-hit industries in the industrials sector since the recession, even managed to post a great month, as output pulled up by 1.7%.
That's good news for Caterpillar (NYSE:CAT), as this industrial giant has a big footprint in the mining industry and hasn't been able to capitalize on the Dow's gains this year due to the industrials sector's struggles. Caterpillar's up 1.7% today, a superb bounce for investors frustrated with the stock's sluggish performance year to date.
ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) hasn't given investors the returns they had hoped to see in 2013, with a 16% jump lagging behind the 21% that the Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI) has produced so far this year. Yet even though Exxon and rival BP (NYSE:BP) spent most of the year trying to catch up to fellow oil giant Chevron (NYSE:CVX), a recent rebound suggests Exxon might be the company to beat in 2014.
For consumers who've paid high prices at the pump for gas for years, the troubles that ExxonMobil has had to deal with might seem trivial. Yet even though relatively high oil prices have supported the use of unconventional production methods like hydraulic fracturing to help Exxon, Chevron, and BP boost their overall production, Exxon in particular still has to work hard just to keep its massive output totals from following the natural rate of decline of its existing wells. Yet could favorable conditions in the natural-gas market help boost Exxon's fortune in the coming year? Let's take a closer look at ExxonMobil's prospects for 2014.
EXXON'S PARTNERSHIP WITH ROSNEFT COULD BE EXTREMELY IMPORTANT IN 2014 AND BEYOND. SOURCE: ROSNEFT MEDIA RELATIONS.
Stats on ExxonMobil
Average stock target price
$96.32
Full-year 2013 EPS estimate
$7.46
Full-year 2014 EPS estimate
$7.90
Full-year 2013 sales growth estimate
(7.7%)
Full-year 2014 sales growth estimate
(2.9%)
Forward P/E
12.4
SOURCE: YAHOO FINANCE.
Will ExxonMobil soar from here?
Judging from the consensus view of most analysts, ExxonMobil doesn't have any upside left for 2014. With the stock above the current target price, even expanding earnings prospects haven't been enough to get Wall Street into Exxon's corner.
Exxon faces what could be a tough environment for oil prices in 2014. Even though the International Energy Agency boosted its 2014 projections for global oil demand last week, the opening of Iranian oil exports following the oil-producing giant's agreement on nuclear issues could add even more supply to the market. As a result, a number of commodities analysts have come out with bearish calls for crude prices, with Barclays forecasting a drop in Brent crude to $101 per barrel and Deutsche Bank following suit with a call for $98 Brent and $89 West Texas Intermediate prices. Obviously, those calls hurt Chevron and BP just as much as they would Exxon.
One big factor for ExxonMobil's future is whether spreads between domestic and global crude oil prices widen or narrow in 2014. During the third quarter, prices for WTI crude approached those of more expensive Brent oil, which knocked Exxon's refining profits down sharply. During the fourth quarter, though, those spreads have widened again. If plentiful domestic oil production leads to continued disparities in oil prices, then a bounce-back for Exxon's refining operations could help support overall earnings in the coming year.
Still, production is an important consideration. BP has moved back into the Gulf of Mexico in search of greater production, working with Exxon on the Thunder Horse platform, which is BP's largest producing deepwater field. Meanwhile, Chevron sees boosting production by 700,000 oil-equivalent barrels per day, more than a quarter above current levels. Exxon will have to work hard to keep production up by capitalizing on areas like the Arctic without sacrificing its historical discipline to do projects only if they produce adequate returns on capital.
Yet what many people neglect to consider about Exxon is its big presence in the natural-gas business. Highly successful liquefied natural gas export terminals built in conjunction with Qatar Petroleum have demonstrated Exxon's leadership in the LNG industry, even as Chevron aims to ramp up its own LNG presence in order to maximize the value of its massive nat-gas finds in western Australia. Closer to home, U.S. natural gas prices have soared recently, although much of the spike came from cold weather that caused a typical knee-jerk reaction higher. Nevertheless, Exxon stands to gain a lot if the rise becomes permanent, with hopes that its acquisition of XTO Energy four years ago will eventually prove to have been a visionary move.
In the end, ExxonMobil's performance in 2014 will rely on the company's ability to keep production volumes up and on global markets for crude oil, natural gas, and refined energy products. If a recovering economy boosts demand, even the pace of new finds across the industry might be insufficient to keep prices from defying analysts' expectations and climbing higher. That could produce Exxon's best chance to beat out Chevron and BP in 2014, as long as Exxon's share of acquiring lucrative new energy opportunities bests those of its rivals.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Click here to add ExxonMobil to My Watchlist, which can find all of our Foolish analysis on it and all your other stocks.
Although we don't believe in timing the market or panicking over daily movements, we do like to keep an eye on market changes -- just in case they're material to our investing thesis.
With the Federal Reserve meeting this week, all eyes are focused on the prospects for economic growth, and this morning's readings on the manufacturing sector pointed to continued strength for the global economy. The Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI) were up more than 130 points as of 11 a.m. EST after the Fed said factory output rose 0.6% in November. More broadly, industrial production jumped 1.1%; that set the stage for Caterpillar (NYSE:CAT) to rebound and for ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) to jump even as Procter & Gamble (NYSE:PG) saw modest declines.
The manufacturing-related news helped give shareholders some respite from Caterpillar's poor performance, with shares rising 1.5%. The heavy-equipment maker has struggled with sluggish economic conditions both in the U.S. and abroad, with 2013's terrible year for mining companies weighing even further on Caterpillar's overall business. Even with today's gains, Caterpillar is still one of the few stocks in the Dow to post a loss so far this year. It'll likely take sustained strength even in the face of a potential Fed move to pull back on its quantitative-easing operations in order to convince investors that a recovery is sustainable.
ExxonMobil soared almost 3% as Goldman Sachs upgraded the oil giant. Goldman pointed to Exxon's having potentially solved its biggest challenge of maintaining production growth in the face of declining output from aging wells. If unconventional sources can keep presenting economically viable alternatives that help boost output, Exxon could benefit from continuing high prices for energy, especially among refined products with more favorable pricing based on global markets.
Gains were elusive for Procter & Gamble, though, as the stock fell 0.3. News of proposed regulation of anti-bacterial soap was just the latest setback that P&G has to face, as the FDA considers whether overuse of such products could pose a threat to public health by spurring resistant bacteria strains and potentially causing other side effects. Given consumers' negative responses to recalls and other controversial product-based problems, P&G needs to get in front of the FDA's call in order to avoid negative publicity that could have a much broader impact on the company than just its soap lines.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


It's been almost exactly one month since Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway (NYSE:BRK.A) (NYSE:BRK.B) announced its latest stock holdings -- and The Motley Fool decided to check in on how the portfolio of the Oracle of Omaha's company is doing.
Buffett has had a solid run since the end of September, and based on the roughly $92 billion that Berkshire held, the company has seen the value of its holdings grow by a little more than $4.5 billion, a return of almost 5%. That narrowly trails the S&P 500's return of 5.5% over that same time period.
Of course, Buffett's investing ability isn't characterized by 55 days of returns, but Berkshire Hathaway has had a number of remarkable performers since September:

As a matter of fact, of the 43 companies in the Berkshire Hathaway portfolio, more than 13 have had returns of 10% or more since September. The biggest winner, Media General (NYSE: MEG), has seen its stock rise by more than 50%, and it's up more than 400% on year.
Here's the entire list of companies delivering remarkable returns for Buffett:
Company
Portfolio Value
(Millions)
Return
(9/30-12/15)
Media General
$66
52.4%
Phillips 66 (NYSE:PSX)
$1,571
23.8%
DISH Network
$25
18.4%
MasterCard
$272
17.1%
Chicago Bridge & Iron
$647
15.8%
General Electric
$14
12.3%
VeriSign
$558
12.1%
DirecTV
$2,183
11.5%
Precision Castparts
$449
11.4%
General Motors
$1,439
11.3%
UPS
$5
11%
American Express
$11,450
10.8%
ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM)
$3,449
10.8%
Despite its big move, Media General represented only 0.07% of the portfolio -- $66 million out of a total $92 billion -- so it didn't move the needle much. This gain was driven in large part by its reporting of third-quarter earnings that surpassed analyst expectations. The stock soared and has been on quite the run ever since.
Next in line was Phillips 66, where the 24% increase in its stock price represented an unrealized gain of nearly $375 million for Berkshire Hathaway. Although Phillips 66 saw its third-quarter earnings drop compared with last year, the company did announce a 25% dividend increase, a move that investors celebrated. Considering that Phillips 66 is the nation's largest refiner in a rapidly expanding American energy market, it's seemingly well positioned for future success, too.
Although it has the "smallest" return -- if you can call an 11% return small! -- the final company I'll mention is ExxonMobil. In the middle of November, Berkshire Hathaway disclosed that it had been steadily adding to a position in the world's largest oil company over the past few months, which was actually one of the contributing factors in sending the stock higher. Buffett's known ability to spot high-quality companies trading at fair prices sent many people pouring into this giant.
In all, the past two and a half months have been kind to Buffett -- and when you consider that Berkshire Hathaway is up almost 30% on the year, he'll probably be sleeping pretty easy this holiday season.


Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


