ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) used to be one of the most profitable companies in the world. At one point, it was an investor's best friend, producing consistent positive growth. In years past, it has been anything but. Over the past five years, the stock is down approximately 32% and down 15% over the past year. Its stock currently trades around $67.50. 
Too often, investors look at a company's balance sheet, see that its long-term debt is just a fraction of its total assets, and infer that it's financially sound. Chances are, they're correct, but it can't hurt for investors to better understand the structure of its debt to be sure. 
ExxonMobil issued $7 billion of both floating and fixed-rate notes on August 14. The company plans to use the net proceeds of $6.975 billion to refinance some of its existing commercial paper, which has an average interest rate of 2.37%. ExxonMobil will also use some of these funds for other general corporate purposes, including working capital, acquisitions, capital expenditures, and other various business opportunities. It's not a bad position to be in and many companies would love to borrow $1.5 billion at 3.095%, repayable in 30 years. But investors shouldn't be as excited about owning ExxonMobil's 2049 notes, however, which yield slightly more than 3% for three decades. It's an excellent deal for ExxonMobil, though. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
According to Moody's Senior Vice President Pete Speer:
ExxonMobil's negative free cash flow and rising debt levels in the first half of this year are pressuring its credit profile, particularly with oil prices averaging mid-cycle levels during the period. While this notes offering is refinancing some of the company's debt on a longer-term basis, the company retains ample flexibility to reduce debt through asset sales and strengthen its credit metrics.
In its prospectus for the notes, the company mentions that its long-term debt, currently $19 billion at the end of June, is 8.7% of ExxonMobil's total market capitalization. Throw in the $7 billion in notes and it increases to 11.6% of its total market capitalization. That's still a minimal amount for ExxonMobil. By all accounts, ExxonMobil's debt is perfectly manageable and could be shrugged off by investors in the future. 
However, what happens if the company decides to make a multi-billion dollar acquisition? As Moody's suggested, the company's free cash flow was negative in the first six months of 2019. A significant acquisition would certainly add to that shortfall. ExxonMobil's free cash flow for the first six months appears to be positive to the tune of $2.9 billion (net cash provided by operating activities of $14.3 billion minus capital expenditures of $11.1 billion). However, Moody's likely factors in some oil-related adjustments to come to a negative number. 
According to S&P Global Market Intelligence, its competitor Chevron (NYSE:CVX) has free cash flow over the past year of $18.5 billion, 25% higher than its GAAP profit for the same period. Meanwhile, ExxonMobil generated $11.3 billion, 36% lower than its GAAP profit. Furthermore, Barclays said ExxonMobil's free cash flow situation is about to get even worse as it cranks up its capital investment just as oil prices appear to be dropping yet again. In April, the price of oil was around $66 at its peak, today it hovers around $53. So while ExxonMobil has managed to release debt on a fixed-rate basis between 1.9% and 3.1%, if its free cash flow shrinks, it will have less available cash to pay down its debt down the road. 
Over the past decade, owning ExxonMobil stock has been like owning a used jet ski, it's only going to get worse. It's unlikely to get much better anytime soon as more and more industries and companies shift away from dependence on oil, while ExxonMobil doubles down. Its 4.74% dividend yield is nice, but it's not enough to rock the boat barring the circumstances. All this being said, ExxonMobil's debt should not be taken lightly. 
For ExxonMobil investors, this suggests it's smart to stay put for the moment. The company is strong enough and has a durable enough track record to be able to rebound from its current issues. That being said, ExxonMobil is not a buy right now for new money. Investors should keep it on their watch lists but currently, it's not worth picking up. Until oil prices start to recover again, ExxonMobil will most likely continue to fall for the time being.
An energy company that might be worth looking into instead is Vestas Wind Systems (OTC:VWDRY). The Danish-based wind turbine company is one of the biggest wind turbine manufacturers and service providers in the world. With more and more of an emphasis being placed on renewable sources of energy, Vestas Wind Systems is an industry leader trending in the right direction.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021



ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and Chevron (NYSE:CVX) are two of the largest oil producers in the country. They're also among the highest-yielding dividend stocks in the oil patch, with Chevron's payout at 4% while Exxon's is up to 5%. Their large scale and attractive yields make these oil giants lower-risk options for those considering oil stocks.
Investors, however, will likely only want to own one of these oil companies in their portfolio. Here's a look at the case for and against buying either one.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Last spring, ExxonMobil launched a bold growth plan. The oil giant aims to increase its output by roughly 1 million barrels of oil equivalent per day (BOE/D) by 2025, pushing it up to 5 million BOE/D. Driving that growth will be high-return projects in the Permian Basin and offshore Guyana. The company initially anticipated that these investments would double its earnings and cash flow by 2025 from 2017's starting point, assuming no improvement in oil prices. That's a significant uptick in profits for such a large company.
Exxon has gotten off to a great start with its strategy. Thanks to outperformance in the Permian Basin and continued exploration success in offshore Guyana, it boosted its earnings growth outlook earlier this year. The company now sees earnings skyrocketing 140% by 2025.
While Exxon's plan doesn't rely on improving oil prices to fuel growth, crude is one of the biggest factors that could derail its strategy. The company needs oil to average $60 a barrel to support its plan. If crude prices decline, earnings won't grow quite as much. At $40 a barrel, for example, Exxon's massive investment to expand its output will only yield a 40% improvement in its earnings per share by 2025. Although there's never any certainty in the oil market, risks are building that oil prices could be lower in the future. One of the biggest is increasing climate change worries, which is accelerating the push toward cleaner and renewable options.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
While Exxon is taking a long-term approach, Chevron is investing more for a near-term payoff. The company's primary goal over the next few years will be to generate free cash flow. It plans to reinvest less than 50% of its annual cash flow from operations through 2021, compared to about 75% at Exxon. Because of that, it's on track to generate significant free cash flow in the coming years.
In the company's view, its investments in high-return areas like the Permian Basin will enable it to grow cash flow from operations from about $14 billion in 2018 up to around $17 billion by 2023. That forecast assumes oil averages $60 a barrel. The company aims to return more than half of that money to investors via its dividend and share repurchase program. Those growing cash returns should give Chevron the fuel to produce healthy total annual returns for its investors as long as oil prices cooperate.
Like Exxon, oil prices remain a major risk for Chevron. If crude falls, the company will produce less cash, which would weigh on its ability to return money to shareholders. However, another issue with Chevron is that it doesn't boast the growth profile of Exxon. Chevron's strategy only has it on track to increase production by about 3% to 4% per year, which would boost cash flow by about 25% through 2023, assuming $60 oil. Exxon, meanwhile, is on track to more than double its cash flow by 2025. Furthermore, it can expand cash flow by 55% even if crude averages $40 a barrel.
Exxon plans to invest heavily on high-return expansion projects over the next several years. That spending spree puts the oil giant on track to more than double its earnings and cash flow by 2025, even without any boost from oil prices. That's a much higher growth rate than Chevron's, which is opting to invest less money on expansion so that it can return more cash to shareholders. Given its outsize growth potential, Exxon's stock could outperform Chevron's over the long term, making it the better one to consider buying.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


