Integrated oil giant Chevron Corporation (NYSE:CVX) isn't ignoring the environmental impact of oil and natural gas -- it realizes that global warming is a very real issue. But it also has to operate in the world as it exists today. And that means Chevron still needs to produce these carbon fuels, something it expects to be doing for many years to come. Here's why.
If you are a die-hard environmentalist or even a steadfast ESG investor, you might be OK with the oil industry facing hard times. After all, oil companies like Chevron produce dirty fuels that make global warming worse. But talk to the CEOs of companies like ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.B) and you get a slightly different story. Recently Chevron's CEO, Michael Wirth, offered his thoughts on the matter.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
In an interview with CNBC, Wirth was asked specifically about the future of oil, leading him to explain:
There's a long future in a growth environment and there's a long future even in an environment that begins to plateau for good economic investment to continue to provide the affordable, reliable, and ever cleaner energy the world will need.
This isn't that much different from what Exxon and Shell have been saying. Exxon, for example, is so confident in the future of oil and natural gas that it has been doubling down on its exploration efforts. Shell has been hedging its bets by dipping its toes into the electricity space, but CEO Ben van Beurden recently explained in a Reuters interview: "Despite what a lot of activists say, it is entirely legitimate to invest in oil and gas because the world demands it."
With the world increasingly concerned about global warming, how can these CEOs still be so positive? The answer is simpler than you might think.
First off, oil giants aren't ignorant to the issue of global warming. As noted, Shell is investing in the electricity space. Exxon is experimenting with algae produced fuel as a way to help the world reduce carbon emissions. And most of the oil giants are following along with Chevron, which is working on ways to reduce the emissions it produces while drilling for oil and natural gas. In fact, it has set environmental goals that target flaring (burning off excess natural gas), methane emissions, and using renewables to power its drilling efforts, among other things. To even skeptics, oil majors are making a token effort to be good environmental stewards.
While some might think ceasing to produce oil and natural gas altogether would be the best way to achieve that, it just isn't pragmatic. For example, the International Energy Agency (IEA) states that, based on existing policy intentions and targets, oil demand isn't likely to peak until at least 2040. To be fair, growth won't be robust, with the IEA predicting that between the mid-2020s and 2040 demand growth "slows to a crawl." But demand will keep rising even if the world puts in place all of its current environmental plans. 
Only that's not exactly how things are shaping up, since many countries around the world are actually falling short of their environmental goals and commitments. So unless countries get really serious about carbon reduction, the future for oil is likely to be pretty robust.
The story is even better for natural gas, which is being used as a transition fuel in the utility sector because it burns more cleanly than coal. That said, the IEA's estimates have missed the mark in the past, underestimating renewable power's growth rates. It is currently offering up another scenario in which oil and natural gas don't do nearly as well. But that scenario requires exceeding the environmental goals that exist today. Based on current success rates, this seems unlikely. 
There are two big problems. The first is that the infrastructure to support oil and natural gas is in place, pervasive, and huge. You can't just replace oil and natural gas overnight. It takes time, money, and effort, and it is likely to be a multi-decade endeavor. At the same time, the world's population continues to grow (largely driven by emerging markets), meaning there will be more need for energy. One form of energy is unlikely to be able to support all of the world's energy needs, meaning that even carbon-based fuels will still have an important place at the table.  While clean energy will likely displace oil and natural gas over time, the chance of a wholesale shift in the next couple of decades seems remote given the current set of circumstances.

CVX DATA BY YCHARTS
But demand is just half the story. The other side of the equation is supply. Oil and natural gas are depleting assets. Once a barrel is pulled from the ground, it is gone forever. If all of the energy companies in the world stopped looking for new oil and natural gas to replace what they are currently producing, future production would plummet. This is why a driller's replacement rate is so important, as it shows how well a company is "replacing" what it produces (between 2013 and 2017 Chevron's replacement rate was a bit over 100%, one of the best rates of its closest peers).
The big takeaway here, however, is that oil and natural gas companies need to keep drilling in order to produce the energy the world continues to demand. So the drilling business can't simply end -- companies like Chevron need to keep doing what they do or the world would fall woefully short of oil and natural gas. So, at least for now, Chevron's core exploration business is supported by both supply and demand issues. While there's no way to tell what the future will bring, Chevron's Wirth appears spot-on when he says there's a "long future" ahead for oil and natural gas... and the companies that produce it.
It can be hard for long-term investors to get beyond Wall Street's whims. Today ESG investing is a headline-grabbing investment approach that doesn't look kindly on oil and natural gas companies like Chevron, even though they remain vital cogs in the global economic machine. With a roughly 4% dividend yield, decades of annual dividend increases, and a strong balance sheet, Chevron is a solid option for dividend-focused investors that are willing to take a contrarian view. The core of that view, meanwhile, is something that all of the major energy CEOs are trying to explain -- and it's pretty simple: Carbon fuels aren't dead yet. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Most companies report their dividends on a cash flow statement, in a separate accounting summary in their regular disclosures to investors, or in a stand-alone press release, but that's not always the case. If not, you can still calculate dividends using just a balance sheet and an income statement, from a company's 10-K annual report. 
Here is the formula for calculating dividends: Annual net income minus net change in retained earnings = dividends paid. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
To figure out dividends when they're not explicitly stated, you have to look at two things. First, the balance sheet -- a record of a company's assets and liabilities -- will reveal how much a company has kept on its books in retained earnings. Retained earnings are the total earnings a company has earned in its history that hasn't been returned to shareholders through dividends.
Second, the income statement in the annual report -- which measures a company's financial performance over a certain period of time -- will show you how much in net earnings a company has brought in during a given year. That figure helps to establish what the change in retained earnings would have been if the company had chosen not to pay any dividends during a given year.
To calculate dividends for a given year, do the following:
The answer represents the total amount of dividends paid.
For example, say a company earned $100 million in a given year. It started with $50 million in retained earnings and ended the year with $70 million. The increase in retained earnings was $70 million minus $50 million, or $20 million.
Here's the math: $100 million net income - $20 million change in retained earnings = $80 million paid in dividends.
One of the most useful reasons to calculate a company's total dividend is to then determine the dividend payout ratio, or DPR. This measures the percentage of a company's net income that is paid out in dividends. 
Here is the DPR formula: Total dividends ¡À net income = dividend payout ratio. 
This is useful in measuring a company's ability to keep paying or even increasing a dividend. The higher the payout ratio, the harder it may be to maintain it; the lower, the better. 
Once you have the total dividends, converting that to per-share is a matter of dividing it by shares outstanding, also found in the annual report.
Here is the formula for dividends per share: Total dividends ¡À shares outstanding = dividends per share. 
Using this method to calculate dividends per share may not be 100% accurate, because a company may increase or lower its dividends (they're usually paid quarterly) over the course of the year, and may also issue or repurchase shares, changing the share count. These changes can impact the accuracy of this calculation.
The best way to find accurate dividend-per-share information is to read the most recent press release or SEC filing when a company announces its next dividend, or seek help from a good online broker, which will show the per-share amount of the last dividend a company paid, or announced it will pay soon. 

Where to invest $1,000 right now
When investing geniuses David and Tom Gardner have a stock tip, it can pay to listen. After all, the newsletter they have run for over a decade, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has quadrupled the market.*
David and Tom just revealed what they believe are the ten best stocks for investors to buy right now¡¦
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021

This article is part of The Motley Fool's Knowledge Center, which was created based on the collected wisdom of a fantastic community of investors. We'd love to hear your questions, thoughts, and opinions on the Knowledge Center in general or this page in particular. Your input will help us help the world invest, better! Email us at knowledgecenter@fool.com. Thanks -- and Fool on!
