Oil titan ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), remains one of the few oil majors that hasn't cut its dividend this year. But this accomplishment is more due to Exxon being stubborn than it is to Exxon outperforming its competitors.
Exxon's COVID-19-related first- and second-quarter losses were its first quarterly losses in decades. And with West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude oil prices now below $40 a barrel, Exxon's dividend -- which yields over 9% -- may be in trouble. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Exxon has had a rough go of it over the last few months. The company was once considered a blue chip darling of the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) before being removed from the Dow after nearly 100 years. Exxon was replaced by tech giant Salesforce.com at the end of August as the index adjusted to better reflect the modern economy. 
Meanwhile, shares of Exxon are down 45% year to date, underperforming the market and the broader energy sector as a whole. 
While Exxon's exclusion from the DJIA may sting the company's pride, a much more pressing matter is the lack of cash that's flowing in to fund its dividend. Now that Royal Dutch Shell cut its dividend, Exxon's spending and its dividend obligation are the largest of all oil majors. 
Before the pandemic, Exxon was planning on averaging $30 billion to $35 billion in annual capital expenditures over the next five years and $33 billion in 2020. It has since decreased estimated 2020 expenditures to $23 billion, which it's on track to hit after notching $12.47 billion in capital and exploration expenditures in the first half of this year. Aside from this spending, Exxon paid $7.43 billion in dividends, but only brought in $6.27 billion of cash flow from operating activities in the first half of this year. Inadequate cash flow has pressured Exxon to raise debt at the expense of its balance sheet.

XOM DEBT TO CAPITAL (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS
Financial metrics like debt to capital, debt to equity, and total net long-term debt are all on the rise, indicating that Exxon's balance sheet is now in its worst shape in five years.
As much as ExxonMobil would like to preserve its dividend, the reality is that lower oil prices and refining margins are pressuring the company to either take on more debt or cut its dividend. Both outcomes are unfavorable.
Often overlooked is the sheer size and impact of Exxon's refining business. Lower demand for transportation fuels like gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel plunged Exxon's refining margins to 50% below 10-year lows, which reduced earnings by $600 million in Exxon's second quarter. That impact was nearly enough to offset the $800 million in savings Exxon generated across its business. This goes to show that there's only so much Exxon can do to limit its losses when much of its business is based on elements outside of its control.
What is in Exxon's control is its dividend. Although a dividend cut would end Exxon's 37-year streak of consecutive dividend raises and strip it of its status as a Dividend Aristocrat, it's really one of the few remaining options Exxon has left aside from taking on more debt, selling more assets, of laying off some of its workforce. 
It's understandable that Exxon's balance sheet would take a hit from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. But until Exxon can prove it can generate enough cash to cover its spending and its dividend obligation, the company's stock seems too risky to invest in at this time. Investors would probably be better off with other top oil stocks instead.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


ExxonMobil's (NYSE:XOM) troubles don't seem to be ending. Rising debt levels and mega capital spending plans in an unfavorable oil price environment led to a steep fall in the stock's price over the past few years. Its removal from the Dow Jones Industrial Average Index has further aggravated investors' concerns about the oil giant, which at one time was the largest listed company by market capitalization. ExxonMobil stock has fallen more than 40% in 2020. But there are reasons why you shouldn't sell this stock just now.
One key factor that contributed to ExxonMobil's survival for more than 100 years is its financial discipline. With rising debt levels recently, though, investors are concerned that ExxonMobil isn't keeping up on this front. Consistently low oil and gas prices have impacted the company's earnings in the last few years, but it has proceeded with its massive growth plans. This has taken a toll on its balance sheet. Additionally, an unprecedented fall in oil demand due to the coronavirus pandemic severely hit ExxonMobil's performance in the second quarter, preventing it from making any debt repayments from earnings.
ExxonMobil's balance sheet is clearly more stretched than Chevron's (NYSE:CVX), but it still stands better than its global peers BP (NYSE:BP), Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.A) (NYSE:RDS.B), and Total (NYSE:TOT).

XOM FINANCIAL DEBT TO EQUITY (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS
Undoubtedly, ExxonMobil needs to address its rising leverage. The good news is that the company aims to keep its debt level from increasing any further. It plans to reduce operating expenses and defer capital investments to preserve cash for dividends should oil markets continue to languish.
Like other oil companies, ExxonMobil is actively working on bringing its costs of production down in response to "lower for longer" oil prices. While that's the right strategy for the long term, the company's -- and its stock's -- performance is nonetheless tied to oil prices. Lower realized prices severely hurt ExxonMobil's Q2 performance.

XOM DATA BY YCHARTS
ExxonMobil stock generally has a high positive correlation with crude oil prices, which reflects the stock's dependence on oil prices. As the above chart shows, the stock's four-month correlation with WTI crude oil price is currently +0.3 -- much lower than what it has been historically. The value of correlation coefficient ranges from -1.0 to +1.0, with +1.0 meaning that the two pretty much move in lockstep with one another.
The stock hasn't recovered as much as oil prices have since April, in part due to the company's increased debt levels and big investment plans. That leaves some scope for it to rise if it posts better performance in the third quarter and improving leverage in the coming years. With the steps ExxonMobil is taking, this scenario is likely.  
WTI oil prices averaged $27.80 in Q2, and have improved to $41.5 so far in Q3. While oil prices are difficult to predict, the worst is likely over. With production cuts on the supply side and recovering activity on the demand side, the oil market dynamics are improving. That bodes well for ExxonMobil.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
ExxonMobil's stand on dividends is probably the diciest of all its strategies. While many analysts and investors believe that the company should cut its dividends to reduce the burden on its balance sheet, the company wants to take this step only as a last resort. Preserving capital is definitely good for long-term growth. However, ExxonMobil believes that the company doesn't need to cut its dividend yet.
It plans to maintain dividends by reducing operating expenses and deferring capital investments. This strategy may work in the short run if oil markets keep improving.
ExxonMobil's balance sheet strength, improving oil market fundamentals, and the company's commitment to maintain its payouts are reasons enough to hold on to your holdings for now.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


