
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
If you're on the hunt for dividend-paying stocks, we've got you covered. There are several solid dividend-paying stocks today that have been out of favor for one reason or another, and that makes for a great opportunity to get a higher than average yield.
We asked five of our contributors to each highlight a stock they think should be on an investor's buy list today. Here's what they had to say. 
Todd Campbell: If you're anything like me, you like a bargain. While some bargain-bin stocks aren't worth owning, one that investors ought to be considering for their portfolios right now is ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM).
ExxonMobil's shares recently sold off sharply alongside a drop in crude oil prices. However, short-term thinking probably isn't the best bet when it comes to evaluating the potential for an energy Goliath like this. A growing global population and expansion in important emerging markets means that the global demand for energy over the long term is heading up, not down. And given that ExxonMobil is one of the largest producers, refiners, and retailers of energy, it's probably going to benefit.
Adding conviction to that thinking is the fact that despite the weakness in crude and natural gas prices this past year, ExxonMobil is still turning a profit. Last quarter, its second-quarter earnings were $1.7 billion. That's a pretty good profit considering that oil prices are a fraction of their price five years ago.
Admittedly, no one knows when energy prices will rebound or stocks like ExxonMobil will head higher. But with a track record that includes an average 6.4% annual dividend hike over the past 33 years, it might be best not to bet against this company.
Tim Green: Consumer electronics retailer Best Buy (NYSE:BBY) may not be widely known as a dividend stock, but it's one worth considering. The company pays a dividend of $0.28 per share each quarter, good for a yield of 3.35%. On top of the regular payment, an annual special dividend sweetens the pot even further. Best Buy has paid a special dividend in each of the past two years, and while the policy isn't guaranteed to continue, it boosts the true dividend yield closer to 4.7%.
Best Buy has turned itself around over the past few years by cutting costs, shedding international divisions, and focusing on competitive prices and customer service. The company produced adjusted earnings of $2.78 per share last year, a number that backs out various one-time costs, putting the P/E ratio at 12 and the payout ratio, including the special dividend, at 56%.
Further dividend increases will likely require Best Buy to grow its earnings, but a high dividend yield means that dividend growth doesn't need to be all that fast in order to make the stock attractive. A lack of exciting new products has been a problem for Best Buy, which has struggled to consistently grow comparable-store sales. But double-digit e-commerce growth and an increased focus on appliances and services should help combat weak sales of PCs and phones.
Best Buy has transformed itself into a far leaner company over the past few years, and the stock deserves a look from dividend investors.
Daniel Miller: Investors looking for an intriguing dividend stock to scribble on their shopping list need look no further than Covanta (NYSE:CVA), which has been on my own list this year. Most investors have never heard of the company, as it delves into an industry few care to look into: waste.
Covanta owns or operates waste-to-energy plants that process roughly 20 million tons of waste each year, incinerating the nonhazardous solid waste into steam and electricity. It then turns around and sells the energy back to the world.
Incineration is widely accepted in Europe, and with Covanta's Dublin project roughly 70% complete, and its presence in China, the company is already one of the world's largest waste-to-energy operators worldwide. One recent victory for the company was winning New York City's contract, which could speed up the adoption of incineration, rather than traditional landfill disposal, to other large U.S. metropolitan areas.
Covanta's business model is great, in theory, as its customers pay it to take waste -- the fuel it uses to create energy -- and then sells the end-product as a typical business does. As with any stock, though, there are risks involved, as lower-cost landfills are still readily available in many regions.
Thus, the dilemma: Covanta either builds more incinerators near large sources of waste to become more cost-competitive, or takes the longer approach and waits as cities grow large enough that landfills become less of an attractive option.
It's definitely an intriguing stock for further research, with a yield of 6.3%, according to Morningstar's estimates. If investors believe more U.S. cities will follow NYC's lead and that the company will bring more of its business to the bottom line after the Dublin project is fully operational, Covanta could be a big long-term winner.
Tyler Crowe: Too often, companies in the oil and gas industry all get lumped into one category, when in fact, each one's business model can be wildly different. Despite the volatility in commodity prices. Enterprise Products Partners (NYSE:EPD) continues to crank out consistent and growing cash flow that it has used to raise its payout to shareholders every quarter for the past 48 quarters in a row.
There are lots of reasons the company is able to do this, but the two most important are its business structure and management's approach to growth. Many other companies own large diversified pipeline and infrastructure networks like Enterprise, but what Enterprise does with that network is what makes it unique. Around 80% of its customers pay it a fixed fee to rent space in that pipe regardless of whether they use it or not, which gives the company a strong base of cash flow from which to work. It also helps that 69% of the company's customers sport investment-grade credit ratings, so there isn't too much worry about a customer not paying the bills.
Then there is the way management has handled its growth and payout over the years. Unlike many other pipeline companies that have paid out every dollar possible to investors and relied on external capital to fund growth, Enterprise has elected to balance its payouts such that it can reinvest in the business and avoid needing to go to the debt or equity market every time it needs a dollar or two to fund new projects. This has given the company much more flexibility in the good times and bad.
At a distribution yield of 5.8%, it isn't the least expensive shares have been in a while, but it's still a respectable price for a steady dividend payer that should be on a dividend investor's radar.
Matt DiLallo: Real estate is a great place to shop for a lucrative income stream. While there are plenty of companies in that sector to choose from, Brookfield Property Partners (NASDAQ:BPY) tops my list. Not only does it pay a pretty lucrative quarterly distribution with a current yield of 4.6%, but it expects to grow that payout by 5% to 8% per year. On top of that, its global real estate portfolio has several catalysts to drive capital appreciation.
The bulk of Brookfield Property Partners' portfolio consists of iconic office properties in gateway markets like New York, London, Toronto, and Sydney, as well as trophy retail assets in top markets across the U.S. These assets are more than 90% leased to long-term tenants, which provides steady cash flow to support the company's distribution. Meanwhile, these assets have solid appreciation potential via increased rents and redevelopment opportunities. 
In addition to its core portfolio, Brookfield intends to invest up to 20% of its capital in opportunistic real estate assets. These include both mispriced properties and those with value-add potential. At the moment, about 15% of its capital is invested in such assets, including stakes in portfolios that own multifamily, industrial, hospitality, and self-storage properties. Not only do these assets generate current cash flow for the company, but each has untapped upside. In fact, Brookfield believes that its opportunistic investments can generate 18% to 20% returns on equity, compared to just 10% to 12% returns from its core portfolio.
Bottom line, investors shopping for some income should take a close look at Brookfield Property Partners, which is a one-stop shop for real estate exposure. 


Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


The Bakken shale's rise to prominence in the oil industry is nothing short of remarkable. While the first oil discovery dates back to 1951, the oil was trapped within the tight shale rocks, which posed a real technical challenge to the industry. Because of that, it was not until the early 2000s when the combination of horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing made the Bakken technically and economically viable for production. In fact, those extraction techniques, combined with triple-digit oil prices, unleashed an oil boom in North Dakota.
The Bakken shale is one of several oil-bearing rock formations within the greater Williston Basin, which spans about 200,000 square miles covering parts of North Dakota, Montana, and Canada:

IMAGE SOURCE: EIA.
While geoscientists long speculated about how much oil resided in the region, it was not until the oil boom kicked into high gear that investors started taking these resource estimates seriously. That was especially true after the U.S. Geological Survey released its updated assessment in 2008, estimating that between 3 billion and 4.3 billion barrels of oil were recoverable using technology that was available at that time. That said, as producers continued to drill and refine their techniques, it led the USGS to ratchet up its ultimate recovery to 7.4 billion barrels of oil in 2014. Meanwhile, others estimate that as much as 24 billion barrels of oil could eventually be recovered, which for perspective would completely satisfy American oil consumption for more than three years at the current consumption rate.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
While oil has been trickling out of the Bakken since the early 1950s, it did not become a large-scale producer until 2007. However, production ramped up dramatically since then, rising from less than 100,000 barrels per day in 2007 to more than 1 million barrels per day by 2014. That remarkable growth was largely fueled by the play's five most dominant players:
Bakken Producer
Average Daily Production (BOE/D)
Bakken Position
Continental Resources
139,602
1,030,000 net acres
Whiting Petroleum
124,900
445,921 net acres
Hess
105,000
578,000 net acres
ExxonMobil
77,000
515,014 net acres
EOG Resources
(Not broken out)
231,000 net acres
DATA SOURCE: COMPANY INVESTOR PRESENTATIONS.
In 2004, Continental Resources (NYSE:CLR) completed the first commercially successful well drilled both horizontally and using hydraulic fracturing in North Dakota's Bakken. It was also the first to drill a horizontal well into the neighboring Three Forks formation. Because it was a first mover in the play, it is no surprise to see that Continental Resources is the leading producer nor that it has the dominate acreage position. While low oil prices in recent years forced the company to slam the breaks on production growth, the company has an enormous resource base to fuel growth when prices improve.
Whiting Petroleum (NYSE:WLL) ascended to the positon as a top producer in the Bakken in late 2014 after paying $6 billion to acquire rival Kodiak Oil & Gas. However, the significant drop in oil prices since that time forced Whiting Petroleum to cut investment spending, which caused its production to decline. That said, instead of investing capital to grow production during the downturn, Whiting is focusing its development dollars on improving well productivity. The initial results have been remarkable, with the company's most recent wells experiencing a triple-digit improvement in initial production rates versus legacy wells.
Hess (NYSE:HES) not only has a leading acreage position in the Bakken, but the bulk of it is located right in the core of the play. Because of that, Hess believes that it will be able to recover 1.6 billion barrels of oil equivalent from the Bakken in the years to come. Furthermore, thanks to its lean manufacturing approach, Hess has some of the lowest drilling costs in the play. That combination a position in the oil saturated core and an industry-leading cost structure enable Hess to earn some of the highest returns in the play at current commodity prices.
ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) acquired its initial position in the oil-rich Bakken when it purchased XTO Energy in 2009. It then boosted its stake by 50% in 2012 via another acquisition. However, while the company was quick to acquire acreage, it has taken a much more methodical approach to development by taking the time to study the play before investing the capital necessary to unlock the 900 million barrels of oil equivalent that lie underneath its acreage. Those development plans mostly remain on hold due to the oil market downturn. However, given its vast capital resources, ExxonMobil could quickly ascend to the top of the heap in the Bakken once prices improve.
Like most Bakken producers, EOG Resources (NYSE:EOG) has moderated its drilling plans amid the downturn in the oil market. This year, the company only expects to complete roughly 35 wells combined in the Bakken and its other Rockies oil plays, compared to 48 last year. But since the company has approximately 2,100 future drilling locations remaining in the Rockies, it can potentially produce more than 1 billion barrels of oil equivalent. Needless to say, when oil prices improve EOG Resources will likely devote more cash to pull this oil out of the ground.
The Bakken shale contains an enormous amount of recoverable oil. At the moment, however, producers are letting most of the oil stay in the ground because prices are just too low.  When prices improve in the future, though, this play could once again boom with activity, likely led by these five dominant producers.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


