CERAWeek is one of the biggest oil and gas industry events, featuring more than 800 speakers and 5,500 attendees from nearly 100 countries who get together in Houston, TX for five days each year. But this year's event has been cancelled, according to a March 1 announcement by its organizer IHS Markit. 
The reason cited for cancelling CERAWeek at the last minute, less than two weeks before it was scheduled to start on March 9, was COVID-19, the strain of coronavirus that's rapidly spreading around the world. Over the past week, coronavirus outbreaks have rapidly spread outside of China and Asia, with multiple deaths being reported in the U.S. in the past few days. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The cancellation of this event may not have direct material impacts on oil and gas company operations, but Houston-area businesses, including restaurants, hotels, and other companies that count on conventions, will lose out on an expected $5 million in business. 
The oil and gas industry was already feeling the impact of coronavirus well before IHS Markit decided to cancel CERAWeek. In recent weeks, the International Energy Agency warned that global crude oil demand would likely fall in the first quarter due to China's steps to curb the spread of coronavirus that would cut its domestic consumption of oil. 
As a result, oil prices plummeted, at one stretch falling for six consecutive trading days. Oil stocks have also fallen sharply as a result of the crude sell-off.  Even after rebounding to start March, Brent crude oil futures are still down more than 25% from the early January peak, along with the share prices of many oil and gas stocks. 
At this writing, the Energy Select Sector SPDR ETF (NYSEMKT:XLE) has lost more than 20% of its value, driven lower by sharp declines by industry heavyweights including ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and Chevron (NYSE:CVX). 

XOM DATA BY YCHARTS
Combined, ExxonMobil and Chevron make up well over 40% of the Energy Select Sector SPDR ETF, but they aren't the only energy companies dragging the sector lower. The group of stocks that make up the next 25% of this ETF have all lost between 26% and 34% of their value over the same period. 
OPEC and some of its partner-countries including Russia, are expected to announce major production cuts soon in an effort to stabilize oil markets, but with the full economic impact of coronavirus still unclear as governments accelerate efforts to curb the spread, 2020 is shaping up to be a very volatile year. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


In 2016, the Obama Administration Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) set new limits on methane emissions by the oil and gas industry, calling for emissions to halve by 2025. The Trump Administration has proposed rolling back those rules, and you might think the oil and gas industry would be happy about that (regulation -- bad, right?)  
Surprisingly, though, not everyone is onboard with rolling back the regulations.
IMAGE SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL
In 2018, for example, Royal Dutch Shell proposed limiting its own methane emissions to no more than 0.2% of natural gas extracted by 2025. (Globally, the International Energy Agency estimates that the average methane leakage rate currently is 1.7%). And today, ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) proposed a "model framework" for government regulation of emissions "in all phases of production."
Hinging on voluntary reductions in methane emissions, Exxon's plan urges companies to replace energy infrastructure components at production sites showing a "high-leak potential," improving production technology in general, and conducting additional research and gathering more data.
Practicing what it preaches, Exxon says it has successfully lowered its own methane emissions by 20% since 2016 at "unconventional operations" (i.e. fracking locations) and is on course to reduce its emissions by 15% across the board.
Why are Shell and Exxon taking these steps? To reduce global warming of course -- because methane in the atmosphere can become 80 times more potent as a greenhouse gas, than carbon dioxide, over long periods of time. Energy companies would also probably prefer to proactively help write the rules that govern their operations than have the EPA do it for them.  
From a competitive perspective, too, increased cost of regulation has the potential to grow costs for the companies' competitors, giving a business advantage to companies with larger scale of operation, companies like ... Shell and ExxonMobil.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


