Although we don't believe in timing the market or panicking over daily movements, we do like to keep an eye on market changes -- just in case they're material to our investing thesis.
The holiday season has been a kind one for the Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI), which managed to continue its six-day run of new record highs with a triple-digit gain Thursday. Favorable news on jobless claims, and a rosy picture of retail performance, helped send the Dow up 122 points on the day, marking its 50th record close during 2013, and leading the other major market benchmarks higher, as well. ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and IBM (NYSE:IBM) were the biggest percentage gainers on the day, while JPMorgan Chase (NYSE:JPM) was the sole member of the Dow not to rise.
Exxon climbed 1.7%, vaulting above the $100 per-share mark for the first time in its history. Domestic oil prices also neared the $100 mark, but Exxon's gains have largely come from the recognition that value investors like Warren Buffett believe that the oil giant can successfully overcome the challenges that its size poses for future growth. Even with huge opportunities in hard-to-reach areas of the world, Exxon faces a mammoth task in producing enough oil and gas to replace falling production on existing wells. Nevertheless, as the economic recovery seems to be taking greater hold both in the U.S. and around the world, rising energy demand could help support oil and gas prices, and give Exxon more support for its impressive bottom line and cash flow.
IBM rose 1.2%, perhaps simply on speculation that stocks that did badly in 2013 will bounce in 2014. Even as the sole falling stock in the Dow so far in 2013, IBM hasn't benefited from some of the typical trends that help losing stocks. With a dividend yield of just 2.1%, and a price-to-earnings ratio that still approaches 13, IBM isn't even the cheapest tech stock in the Dow, with rivals offering better yields and more turnaround potential. IBM's valuation is below the average Dow stock, but many tech investors would argue that there are better picks among megacap technology stocks than Big Blue.
JPMorgan lost 0.1%, with the likely culprit coming from the rise in Treasury bond yields today. Treasury yields briefly hit the 3% mark, and JPMorgan has previously said that it was vulnerable to rising bond yields because of its extensive portfolio holdings. The big question facing the bank is whether yields will rise further in light of the Fed's decision to ease off on quantitative easing-based bond purchases, but JPMorgan will also have to deal with ongoing regulatory threats that could cost the bank even more in fines, settlements, and other costs.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Although we don't believe in timing the market or panicking over daily movements, we do like to keep an eye on market changes -- just in case they're material to our investing thesis.
Many companies across America are moving slowly today in the wake of the holiday, but stocks aren't letting up on their recent advance. The Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI) has gained 118 points as of 2:37 p.m. EST. ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) is up more than 1.7% to lead the blue-chip index higher. On the other side of the index, however, Johnson & Johnson (NYSE:JNJ) is having a hard time getting anything going. Let's catch up on what you need to know.
Jobless claims back on track
The economy received another bright sign of hope to start the day, as U.S. initial jobless claims for last week fell sharply. Weekly jobless claims dropped 42,000 to 338,000, according to today's report, a dip that beat economist predictions and also marked the biggest weekly drop in more than a year. Granted, jobless claims had spiked in the previous two weeks before this latest drop, but the economy doesn't look to be backtracking on the progress it's made in 2013.
ExxonMobil hasn't made much news today, but this Big Oil stock has still climbed to the top of the Dow with a big day. Exxon's total company revenue has fallen more than 8% year over year through the first nine months of 2013. However, don't just blame Exxon: The dip has followed a slowdown among its rivals, with fellow Dow oil giant Chevron (NYSE:CVX) also seeing revenue decline by around 5% year over year through the same time period.
The dip's taken a toll on both Exxon and Chevron's earnings per share through the year and on their stocks -- both Chevron and Exxon rank among the bottom 10 Dow Jones components in year-to-date performance, with shares gaining less than 20% in that period. However, as fellow analyst Bob Cura notes, the increasing drive for natural gas in the U.S. could boost the fortunes of both companies in 2014. Exxon's reporting higher natural gas demand, while Chevron looks to increase its natural gas production dramatically over the coming decade.
Johnson & Johnson stock has picked up roughly up roughly 0.3% so far today. Still, there's good news for J&J investors, as rumors have circulated that the company is in talks with the Carlyle Group (NASDAQ:CG) about selling off its blood-testing diagnostics unit. Johnson & Johnson originally hoped for up to $5 billion for its diagnostics division, but while the deal with Carlyle isn't sealed yet it's not a bad starting point for discussion for the company or its investors. Some have called for J&J to begin spinning off or selling its peripheral businesses like Big Pharma rivals such as Pfizer have in the past, so keep an eye on Johnson & Johnson for more potential deals.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


There are two great mysteries in this world: the secret of the fox, and the purpose of the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI).
OK, so we figured out what the fox actually says ages ago, but have you ever stopped to consider what the Dow is meant to do? Spoiler alert: It's not designed to mirror the American stock market. The index is also not looking for the most attractive investment opportunities, or else ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and AT&T (NYSE:T) might have been dropped from the Dow already.
In the video below, Fool analyst Anders Bylund mercifully avoids singing about the mysterious fox. Instead, he's explaining what the Dow really was designed to do and how astute investors can use it as a research resource.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021



As we head into the new year, investors should be looking at stocks both to buy and to sell. After a great year on the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI), there are a few companies that could be in for a tough 2014.
ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) is fighting the trend of slowing oil usage in developed countries and has seen higher costs for exploration. Revenue and profit are down in recent years, meaning the stock isn't the safe haven it once was. 
It's been an outstanding year for JPMorgan Chase (NYSE:JPM) on the market, but legal settlements have cost the company billions. Eventually, that will catch up to the company, and there's more downside risk in 2014 than upside potential.
Finally, Caterpillar (NYSE:CAT) is facing headwinds from China, which appears to be heading toward a building bubble. If building slows in developing countries, so will revenue and profit, which are already volatile at Caterpillar. 
Erin Miller sat down with Fool contributor Travis Hoium to find out more about why he thinks these stocks will underperform in 2014.



Before you consider JPMorgan Chase & Co., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and JPMorgan Chase & Co. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021



Dividend stocks outperform non-dividend-paying stocks over the long run. It happens in good markets and bad, and the benefit of dividends can be quite striking: Dividend payments have made up about 40% of the market's average annual return from 1936 to the present day.
But few of us can invest in every single dividend-paying stock on the market, and even if we could we're likely to find better gains by being selective. Today, two energy companies -- one in petroleum, the other in electricity -- will square off in a head-to-head battle to determine which offers a better dividend for your portfolio.
Tale of the tape
Established in 1945, Southern Company (NYSE:SO) is the fourth-largest electric utility holding company in the U.S. Headquartered in Atlanta, Ga., the company operates four regulated utilities with a total generating capacity of nearly 46,000 megawatts, and serves more than 4.4 million customers in Georgia, Alabama, Florida, and Mississippi. Southern also offers fiber-optic and wireless communications services through its Southern Telecom and SouthernLINC Wireless units. It is also building the first new nuclear plants in a generation near Augusta, Ga. Southern is also involved in the development of a state-of-the-art coal gasification plant and it also operates one the largest photovoltaic and biomass plants in the U.S.
ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), the world's largest oil and gas producer, was formed by the merger of two direct descendants -- Exxon and Mobil -- of Standard Oil, which was founded by John D. Rockefeller in 1870. It is also the world's third-largest company by revenue and the second largest by market capitalization. Exxon operates 37 refineries in 21 countries with a combined processing capacity of 5.4 million barrels per day, which is more than the total oil and gas produced by several countries around the world. The company has also entered into a strategic alliance with Russian oil and gas behemoth Rosneft to carry out exploration and development activities in Russia, the United States, and other parts of the world.
Statistic
Southern
ExxonMobil
Market cap
$36 billion
$434.4 billion
P/E ratio
21.4
13
Trailing 12-month profit margin
9.6%
7.7%
TTM free cash flow margin*
0.2%
2.9%
Five-year total return 
45.3%
50%
SOURCE: MORNINGSTAR AND YCHARTS
* FREE CASH FLOW MARGIN IS FREE CASH FLOW DIVIDED BY REVENUE FOR THE TRAILING 12 MONTHS.
Round one: endurance (dividend-paying streak)
Southern has paid uninterrupted dividends for a period of more than 65 years, since it first paid in 1948. But Southern's 65-year dividend-paying streak can't hold a candle to Exxon, whose dividend history as a separate company dates all the way back to 1911 and which can trace its dividend history to the days when Rockefeller still led Standard Oil. Exxon's dividend streak of 103 years hands it the endurance crown without a fight.
Winner: ExxonMobil, 1-0
Round two: stability (dividend-raising streak)
According to the DRIP Investing Resource Center, ExxonMobil has increased dividend payouts for nearly 31 years in a row. Southern has increased its dividends for a continuous period of 12 years. That's a second easy win for ExxonMobil here.
Winner: ExxonMobil, 2-0
Round three: power (dividend yield)
Some dividends are enticing, but others are merely tokens that barely affect an investor's decision. Have our two companies sustained strong yields over time? Let's take a look:

SO DIVIDEND YIELD (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS
Winner: Southern, 1-2
Round four: strength (recent dividend growth)
A stock's yield can stay high without much effort if its share price doesn't budge, so let's take a look at the growth in payouts over the past five years.

SO DIVIDEND DATA BY YCHARTS
Winner: ExxonMobil, 3-1
Round five: flexibility (free cash flow payout ratio)
A company that pays out too much of its free cash flow in dividends could be at risk of a cutback, particularly if business weakens. We want to see sustainable payouts, so lower is better:

SO CASH DIVIDEND PAYOUT RATIO (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS
Winner: ExxonMobil, 4-1
Bonus round: opportunities and threats
ExxonMobil may have won the best-of-five on the basis of its history, but investors should never base their decisions on past performance alone. Tomorrow might bring a far different business environment, so it's important to also examine each company's potential, whether it happens to be nearly boundless or constrained too tightly for growth.
Southern opportunities:
ExxonMobil opportunities:
Southern threats:
ExxonMobil threats:
One dividend to rule them all
In this writer's humble opinion, ExxonMobil has a better shot at long-term outperformance thanks to its multiyear leadership in the oil and gas industry. The company has a large amount of recoverable oil and gas resources around the world, but it has been suffering from pricing difficulties in crude this year. On the other hand, Southern has been aggressively investing to diversify its business portfolio, and a focus on low-cost power generation should provide competitive advantages over its peers. This alone might not be enough to offset its limited reach and regulatory opposition to its efforts at pricing power. You might disagree, and if so you're encouraged to share your viewpoint in the comments below. No dividend is completely perfect, but some are bound to produce better results than others. Keep your eyes open -- you never know where you might find the next great dividend stock!



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


