Despite a lingering oil sector downturn, ExxonMobil Corporation (NYSE:XOM) has remained an industry leader. For example, unlike many peers, it's been profitable throughout this difficult period and it's continued to increase its dividend annually  for 34 years and counting. While investors can take solace in the oil and gas giant's business performance, that doesn't mean the very real issues clouding the company's outlook can be ignored. Here are three challenges facing ExxonMobil Corporation today.
Low oil prices have an impact throughout Exxon's business. On the one hand, cheap oil actually helps the company's refining and chemicals operations because it means a key feedstock is, well, cheap. That, in turn, helps these businesses widen margins and make more money. This highlights a key advantage of Exxon's integrated business model. But if prices go up, margins will get squeezed.     
IMAGE SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL CORPORATION
And then there's oil drilling, which is the largest part of the business. In the second quarter of 2014, before oil prices started a precipitous plunge from over $100 a barrel to a low around $30, Exxon's upstream segment had earnings of nearly $7.9 billion. In the fourth quarter of 2016, after prices had recovered from their lows to the $50 range, upstream earned roughly $1.4 billion. That figure is after taking out the impact of an asset impairment charge that pushed it nearly $650 million into the red.  
The benefit of low oil prices can offset only a portion of the pain when it's on that scale. In other words, oil will continue to drive results up and down, and there's little Exxon can do about that. That said, the company has used the downturn to invest in new assets that should help enhance its flexibility in a low-oil-price world (more on the pros and cons of that below). .
Oil prices have a direct impact on the second big issue facing Exxon: maintaining reserves. From a big-picture point of view, oil companies have a set amount of oil and natural gas in the ground. Every barrel they pull up is one less barrel available for the future. Which is why oil companies are always on the lookout for new sources of oil. In 2016 Exxon replaced only about two-thirds of the oil it produced. That was the first time in more than two decades that it didn't replenish its reserves with at least the amount it drilled.  
Replacement numbers go up and down, so one year isn't enough to indicate a problem...yet. The issue is that low oil prices make it harder to find profitable oil to replace what's pulled up, let alone enough to actually grow reserves. When oil is over $100 a barrel, companies can drill almost anywhere profitably (that's hyperbole, but you get the idea). When oil is at $30 a barrel, it's awfully hard to justify spending much money on anything. 
That said, Exxon recently announced a large oil discovery in offshore Guyana. It's also expanded its footprint in the U.S. onshore space via an acquisition that roughly doubled its Permian basin holdings. Both should help support its reserves over time. And Exxon has plans to up its capital spending over the next few years, too. Still, keep an eye on reserves: If the situation doesn't improve Exxon will have a major long-term problem.   
The Permian acquisition is notable because it indicates a shift in the company's thinking. Historically, Exxon has focused on large and expensive projects that took years to complete. That's pretty much the specialty of big integrated oil companies. Although Exxon is hardly abandoning such projects, low oil prices make it harder to justify those investments.  
EXXON IS SHIFTING AWAY FROM GIANT OIL PROJECTS OVER THE NEAR TERM. IMAGE SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL
What the Permian purchase suggests is that the oil giant is looking to increase its flexibility by increasing its exposure to onshore U.S. drilling, which is easier to ramp up and down as oil prices change. That surely adds flexibility, but it's a different approach than Exxon has taken in the past and it could limit the company's ability to provide investors with industry leading investment returns. The U.S. onshore space simply doesn't offer the same returns as large projects.       
The increased focus on so-called "short cycle" projects (U.S. onshore) is coupled with continued investment in Exxon's downstream chemicals and refining businesses. The downstream business tends to have thinner margins than the upstream segment. In the end, more than half of Exxon's capital spending between now and 2020 is projected to support investments that don't provide the same return as big projects. That's potential headwind to Exxon living up to its past successes.  
On the plus side, all of this should help to diversify Exxon's business. And that should make returns more stable over time, which isn't necessarily a bad thing if you are looking for a stable dividend paying business. 
Although Exxon just went through a leadership change, the company is pretty insular and changes relatively slowly. That's not a bad thing in this case, since Exxon has long been an industry leader. I believe strongly that it will survive this downturn and prosper again -- otherwise I wouldn't own it.
However, my confidence doesn't alter the fact that the company has to deal with low oil prices and their impact on earnings. Or the impact that cheap oil has on finding profitable new oil resources. And then there's the company's increasing focus on businesses that don't offer the same bang for the buck as the giant oil projects for which Exxon is known. There are clearly risks here.
That said, all of this bad news could be a good opportunity for long-term investors since the yield is toward the high end of its historical range. But you have to believe Exxon can survive the notable challenges it's facing today, and thrive in the future if you are going to pull the trigger here.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Investors rely on dividend stocks for the income they need, and that makes it critically important to choose companies that have a track record of paying dividends through good times and bad. Out of the thousands of stocks on the market, only a handful of companies have stood the test of time by delivering dividends to shareholders for more than 120 years. Below, we'll look at 10 dividend stocks that pass the test so you can decide whether they belong in your portfolio.
IMAGE SOURCE: JOHNSON CONTROLS.
Johnson Controls (NYSE:JCI) is well known for its heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems, as well as its security and energy-management services. The company also has a business division that supplies batteries to the automotive market. Johnson Controls' industrial business is vulnerable to the ups and downs of economic cycles, but it has done a good job of sustaining dividends: It has made consecutive payouts dating back to 1887.
Johnson Controls' stock currently sports a dividend yield of 2.3%. Dividend growth has also been an important part of the company's history. It has increased its dividend in 36 of the past 38 years, having given investors substantial raises in many of the past several years, and it looks poised to keep sharing its success with its shareholders.
IMAGE SOURCE: STANLEY BLACK & DECKER.
Stanley Black & Decker (NYSE:SWK) is a giant in the power tools business, with the formerly independent Stanley Works and Black & Decker companies coming together several years ago and joining forces. In addition to its tools, the company also provides security systems, fastening products, welding equipment, and a variety of hand tools. Stanley Black & Decker has a dividend history that dates back to 1877.
Stanley Black & Decker's current dividend yield of 1.7% isn't all that high. But the company boasts a 49-year track record of dividend increases each and every year, including its most recent boost of more than 5%. Going forward, the need for basic tools should keep Stanley Black & Decker moving higher even in challenging economic environments.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) needs no introduction. The oil giant is a powerhouse in the global energy industry, and its integrated oil and natural gas business is the benchmark against which smaller oil companies measure themselves. With a history that goes back to Standard Oil, ExxonMobil and its predecessors have paid dividends since 1882.
ExxonMobil has a healthy dividend yield of 3.8%, and it also has a history of annual dividend increase that goes back 35 years. As long as you keep gassing up your car or heating your home, demand for ExxonMobil's products will continue, and that should help power dividend raises for years to come.
IMAGE SOURCE: ELI LILLY.
Eli Lilly (NYSE:LLY) makes medications that millions of people need to get and stay healthy. Lilly has a huge stable of lucrative prescription drugs to drive sales and profits, with products like antidepressant Cymbalta and schizophrenia and bipolar disorder treatment Zyprexa leading the way. The company has passed that success on to its shareholders by paying a dividend since 1885.
Lilly's dividend yield of 2.5% is solid, but the company doesn't have a long streak of annual dividend increases. After more than 40 years of consecutive boosts, Lilly kept its dividend flat in the aftermath of the 2008-2009 financial crisis. For now, Lilly has focused on making the most of its drug opportunities, and investors are sharing the bounty.
IMAGE SOURCE: CONSOLIDATED EDISON.
Utilities are traditionally great dividend stocks, and Consolidated Edison (NYSE:ED) has been especially strong. As the primary regulated utility for New York City and the surrounding area, the company serves about 3.4 million electric customers and 1.1 million natural-gas customers in the city and in Westchester County, with additional customers in outlying areas. The utility has paid dividends since 1885.
Consolidated Edison's current dividend yield is 3.5%, which is well above the market's average, and the company also boasts a 43-year streak of consecutive dividend increases. Boring businesses can be beautiful for shareholders, and Consolidated Edison shows that the right combination of fundamental strength and regular income can make for an invaluable addition to your portfolio.
IMAGE SOURCE: UGI.
Along the same lines, UGI (NYSE:UGI) is a distributor of electricity, natural gas, and propane. The company doesn't have the brand awareness of Consolidated Edison, but it serves nearly 2 million residential and commercial propane customers throughout the 50 states. Its distribution network and retail sales services help customers directly, while its electricity generation facilities supply power well beyond its home market of Pennsylvania. The company's dividend history started in 1885.
UGI's current dividend yield is 2%, but it has a 30-year track record of boosting its payments every year. Moreover, the company has ample earnings to finance its dividends, which gives it plenty of room for potential increases down the road.
IMAGE SOURCE: PROCTER & GAMBLE.
Procter & Gamble (NYSE:PG) is a household name around the world, with roughly two dozen different brands producing at least $1 billion in sales annually. From Tide detergent to Pampers diapers and Crest toothpaste, you can find Procter & Gamble products in nearly every medicine cabinet and laundry room in the U.S., as well as in many countries across the globe. The company has paid its shareholders dividends since 1891.
Procter & Gamble pays a 3.2% dividend yield, and its streak of regular payout increases is one of the longest in the stock market at 61 years and counting. The Dow Jones component's market exposure is unparalleled, and as developing economies gain purchasing power, they should help boost P&G's growth in the long run.
IMAGE SOURCE: COCA-COLA.
Coca-Cola (NYSE:KO) is an American icon whose simple soft drinks have turned into a consumer-products monolith. Even as the company has had to deal with threats to its dominance, including restrictions and taxes on sugary soft drinks, Coca-Cola has managed to weather these worldwide trends and come out with new products to make up lost ground. Coca-Cola's dividend record stretches back to 1893.
Coca-Cola boasts a 3.5% dividend yield and a 55-year track record of annual dividend increases. Some investors fear for the future of its business, but Coca-Cola has changed gears enough times in its history that it should be able to overcome its current challenges and maintain its dominance over the beverage market.
IMAGE SOURCE: COLGATE-PALMOLIVE.
Like Procter & Gamble, Colgate-Palmolive (NYSE:CL) has ridden the global rise of the consumer class by selling everyday people the everyday products they need. Its many brands of household consumables, like Colgate toothpaste and Palmolive dish detergent, have achieved near-ubiquity -- and raked in huge profits. The company has been generous in sharing those profits with others, having paid dividends since 1895.
Colgate-Palmolive's stock yields just 2.2%, but it has a 54-year dividend streak. If its emerging-market sales continue to accelerate, then Colgate-Palmolive should be in an ideal position to keep making shareholders richer.
CLOCK TOWER IN YORK, PENNSYLVANIA. IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Few investors have heard of York Water (NASDAQ:YORW), but the water utility specialist serves its customers in Pennsylvania with high-quality water and wastewater services. York serves a wide variety of different types of residential and commercial customers, helping to spur greater industrial activity. Its history of dividend payments goes back more than 200 years.
Right now, York Water yields just 1.7%. But the company has increased its payout for 20 straight years, and some investors believe future consolidation in the water utility business could help York Water find partners and grow even bigger and more financially healthy. People will always need water, and this utility has what it takes to succeed.
Strong stocks with lucrative dividends are valuable, and the best dividend stocks keep paying dividends through thick and thin. For investors who appreciate a good track record, these stocks are worth a closer look for your dividend portfolio.



Before you consider The Coca-Cola Company, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and The Coca-Cola Company wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


