Better late than never! 
After dithering for a few weeks, oil giant ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) finally announced that it was going to cut its 2020 capital spending levels and operational expenses. With this decision, it joins fellow oil majors Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.A) (NYSE:RDS.B), Chevron (NYSE:CVX), and Total (NYSE:TOT) in taking action to preserve cash for its dividend payments.
It's a detailed plan, but will it be enough? Here's what dividend investors need to know.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
ExxonMobil CEO Darren Woods was a late convert to the cost-cutting party. In fact, he originally had exactly the opposite planned for 2020, promising big increases in capital spending. At the company's investor day on March 5, he announced that ExxonMobil would "use the strength of our balance sheet to invest through the cycle."
Ordinarily, that wouldn't be a bad strategy. ExxonMobil has a strong balance sheet and a good credit rating, and when times are tough, other companies that are feeling the pinch can sometimes be willing to sell assets at a steep discount. However, a day after Woods announced this plan, the OPEC+ alliance failed to reach an agreement on production limits, and oil prices fell by almost 50% to around $25 per barrel. Because none of the oil majors would be able to profitably produce oil at those prices, investors got concerned about potential dividend cuts.
Many of Exxon's peers -- also with solid balance sheets and credit ratings -- quickly announced 2020 spending cuts to reassure investors that their dividends would be safe. Shell and Total each announced cuts to their 2020 capital spending on March 23, while Chevron projected its own 20% cut on March 25. Total and Shell also suspended their share-buyback programs.
Woods dragged his feet, though. Although Exxon released a statement claiming it was "considering" such cuts, it wasn't specific, and management didn't commit to a particular strategy. Observers wondered whether Woods was considering a "damn the torpedoes; full speed ahead" spending plan, which would almost certainly have resulted in a backlash from investors.
Ultimately, though, Woods seems to have seen the light, releasing a detailed response on April 7. However, there are signs he hasn't totally abandoned his original ambitions. 
Exxon's cost reductions include a 30% cut in 2020 capital spending to about $23 billion. It also plans to reduce operating expenses by about 15%. Like many other producers, Exxon has decided that the largest share of the cuts will come from Texas' Permian Basin. A final investment decision on an offshore opportunity in Mozambique has also been delayed. 
On the other hand, Exxon's promising deepwater drilling operations offshore Guyana, on the northern coast of South America, are largely moving ahead as planned. Some additional developments may be delayed for six to 12 months as the company waits for government approval to add a third production vessel at its Payara field. Deepwater drilling has higher up-front exploration costs than shale drilling, but once wells are installed, they have longer lifespans and fewer associated expenses than the constant churn of onshore shale wells. 
The 30% cut to 2020 capex is surprisingly large, considering Chevron, Shell, and Total only announced capital spending cuts of about 20%. However, Woods doesn't seem to have completely abandoned his spending ambitions. In the statement announcing the 2020 cuts, Woods noted (emphasis added):
The long-term fundamentals that underpin the company's business plans have not changed -- population and energy demand will grow, and the economy will rebound. Our capital allocation priorities also remain unchanged. Our objective is to continue investing in industry-advantaged projects to create value, preserve cash for the dividend and make appropriate and prudent use of our balance sheet.
In the short term, Exxon's ability to pay its dividend was never really in doubt. The company has a strong credit rating and a sturdy enough balance sheet to weather several months of reduced oil prices without putting its long-term financial health in jeopardy. With a 30% cut in capital spending, ExxonMobil will be able to devote significantly more cash to help fund its dividend.
Luckily for Exxon -- and for oil companies in general -- OPEC+ recently agreed to cut production by 9.7 million barrels/day. While that won't be enough to offset the coronavirus-triggered lack of demand, recent news reports seem to suggest that the pandemic may be peaking earlier than expected. If that's indeed the case, global travel bans -- one cause of the drop in demand for oil-based fuels -- may be lifted sooner rather than later. 
These conditions could change at a moment's notice, of course, but for now Exxon looks almost certain to continue its 37-year streak of annual dividend increases.
Woods seems to have successfully threaded the needle. He's placating the markets by cutting expenses in the short term, while recommitting to his long-term strategy for the company. That's actually a good thing: Investors shouldn't want a CEO to change the company's long-term strategy just for the sake of juicing the share price over the short term.
If conditions change significantly -- say, if COVID-19 makes a resurgence, or if the new oil production limits fall apart again -- then investors should probably reexamine the company's prospects. For now, though, Exxon looks like a buy for dividend investors.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


With oil prices continuing to hover at extremely low levels, ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) has taken more action to shore up its finances.
The energy giant on Monday raised $9.5 billion by selling five new bond issues with maturities ranging from five to 31 years, according to a Reuters report. The article noted that ExxonMobil had originally planned to raise $9 billion through the offering; the higher capital raise indicates that demand was strong for the bond issue. 
Last week, ExxonMobil announced it would cut its 2020 capital spending by 30% and would reduce its operating expenses by 15%. All of these moves were made in response to conditions of heavy oversupply in the oil market -- a situation caused both by the steep plunge in demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic and by producers pumping a glut of crude. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Though ExxonMobil is paying more to borrow than it did prior to the pandemic, the Reuters article noted that the bond rates for this issue are lower than they were for bonds the company sold approximately four weeks ago. This is a sign that investor confidence is improving after a period of high volatility in the equity and energy markets. 
In announcing the company's operational cutbacks last week, Chairman and CEO Darren Woods said the moves were meant to improve ExxonMobil's financial position until markets rebound, and to "preserve cash for the dividend and make appropriate and prudent use of our balance sheet."
The new debt deal was to further improve its cash position, particularly while the debt market is receptive to new issuers, according to the report. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


For the past eight weeks, we've witnessed record-breaking volatility in the stock market as a result of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). The mitigation measures currently put in place to curb the transmission of COVID-19 have shut down most nonessential business activity and wound up pushing equities to their fastest bear market in history (just 17 trading sessions for all three major indexes).
But the thing about bear markets is that they've always represented an opportunity to buy into great businesses at a discount. That's because every stock market correction in history has eventually been erased by a bull-market rally.
With this in mind, I'd like to share the 10 brand-new stocks I chose to add to my portfolio as the stock market crashed.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
In my opinion, Amazon (NASDAQ:AMZN) could find its way to $5,000 a share by 2023, so how could I not add with the stock going on-sale during the stock market crash. While I appreciate Amazon's e-commerce dominance, and enjoy seeing its global Prime membership figures grow (which boosts its generally small retail margins), I'm really excited to watch Amazon Web Services (AWS) blossom.
Amazon's cloud-services segment is growing sales at more than twice the rate of e-commerce, and cloud margins are considerably higher than retail margins. As AWS grows into a larger component of total sales, Amazon should see its cash flow per share balloon from $76 in 2019 to about $201 in 2023. That's more than enough to get me onboard with this growth story.
IMAGE SOURCE: SQUARE.
Credit-service providers have been clobbered by recession fears, which offered the perfect opportunity to nibble on point-of-sale solutions company Square (NYSE:SQ).
On one hand, Square's seller ecosystem continues to expand, with around $106 billion in payments traversing its network in 2019, up 25% from the previous year. What's most notable about the seller ecosystem is that Square is generating more revenue than ever from large businesses (55% in Q4 2019, compared to 47% in Q4 2017).
On the other hand, Square's Cash App is growing by leaps and bounds. The number of monthly active uses has more than tripled in two years to 24 million, while revenue per active customer has more than doubled to north of $30. Cash App will likely be the catalyst that sees Square's revenue triple over the next five years. 
IMAGE SOURCE: FACEBOOK.
Social media is all about eyeballs -- and no company is better at generating views than Facebook (NASDAQ:FB). This is a company that ended 2019 with 2.5 billion monthly active users and 1.66 billion daily active users. Even with advertising dollars likely down significantly in the very short-term with nonessential businesses closed, there's simply no better way for businesses to reach more eyeballs than through Facebook.
The other factor here is that Facebook still has a number of key assets left to monetize. It owns four of the seven most-visited social media platform -- Facebook, WhatsApp, Facebook Messenger, and Instagram -- and has only aimed to monetize Facebook and Instagram, thus far. When Facebook does monetize WhatsApp and Messenger, expect sales and cash flow to explode higher.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Although most brick-and-mortar retail is best left on the clearance rack, teen and young-adult-focused retailer American Eagle Outfitters (NYSE:AEO) has consistently shown that it has what it takes to remain relevant. While it's a streak that'll undoubtedly be broken by the coronavirus, American Eagle has reported 20 consecutive quarters of positive comparable-store sales growth, with its intimate apparel Aerie brand reporting 21 consecutive quarters of double-digit comp-sales growth.
Unlike most retailers, American Eagle remains debt-free, and it's done a top-notch job of removing excess inventory from its stores, which is a testament to the quality of the management team leading the company. With shares at levels that haven't been seen in well over a decade, I figured now was the perfect time to pounce.
IMAGE SOURCE: PINTEREST.
Speaking of social media eyeballs, Pinterest (NYSE:PINS) reminds me a lot of Facebook in its younger days. The only exception being that Pinterest really seems to be resonating with international users. In 2019, monthly active user (MAU) count grew by 70 million to 335 million, with approximately 63 million new MAUs deriving from international markets. This is a big reason why average revenue per user in international markets rose 115% to $0.54 in 2019. 
Pinterest has also just scratched the surface on its role in the e-commerce arena. Already known for its role in helping users share knowledge and interests, Pinterest should be able to utilize video and other engagement initiatives to improve consumer follow-through with product purchases.
Currently on the verge of recurring profitability, I felt now was the time to own this explosive growth stock.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
One of the newest purchases during the stock market crash that I'm most excited about is healthcare solutions provider Livongo Health (NASDAQ:LVGO). Livongo's primary audience (for now) is diabetics, of which there are 34.2 million in the U.S., along with another 88 million people showing the symptoms of prediabetes.
What allows Livongo to stand out is its ability to use artificial intelligence and a mountain of data to help its members take care better care of themselves. Essentially, Livongo elicits behavioral changes in diabetes patients that helps them live healthier lives.
Revenue data would certainly suggest that this approach is working. Preliminary sales data from Livongo of up to $66.5 million for Q1 2020 represents a more-than-doubling from Q1 2019's sales. This also follows a near-doubling in the number of members using Livongo's subscription service between December 2018 and December 2019.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Keeping with the theme of picking up attractive credit-service providers, I also added Mastercard (NYSE:MA) to my portfolio. Mastercard may not have the mammoth U.S. market share of Visa, but being second-place in the consumption-heavy U.S. market is still an enviable position. Mastercard has also done a good job of growing its share of the branded debit-card market in the U.S. since the Great Recession.
Aside from having an exceptionally long runway for growth given that a majority of global transactions are still being conducted in cash, I fancy Mastercard for being a payment processor and not a lender. By focusing solely on the processing side of things, Mastercard has removed any direct impact of rising credit delinquencies from the equation.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Though my track record with oil drillers is not encouraging, I decided to dip my toe in the pond with ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) at a roughly 16-year low.
ExxonMobil does generate the bulk of its profits from drilling and exploration, which will undoubtedly be compromised in the near-term by low crude prices. But it's also an integrated oil and gas company, meaning its downstream petrochemical and refining operations should receive a boost from lower crude pricing.
ExxonMobil also has plenty of levers its can pull to counteract what'll likely be relatively temporary weakness in the oil market. Last week, it shaved as much as $10 billion off of its capital expenditures planned for 2020, and it could always dial back its dividend to conserve cash flow.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Canadian cannabis stocks have been pulverized over the past year, with many still losing money. However, extraction-services provider MediPharm Labs (OTC:MEDIF) took less than five months to become profitable after turning on the lights, which has me very encouraged for the long run.
MediPharm is a company that takes cannabis and hemp biomass and processes it for the resins, distillates, concentrates, and targeted cannabinoids that go into making high-margin marijuana derivatives, such as edibles, infused beverages, and topicals. Most of MediPharm's clients are on fixed price and volume commitments, which allows for highly predictable cash flow.
I expect the near-term to remain unsettled given the numerous regulatory issues the Canadian pot industry is contending with, but MediPharm is adequately capitalized to survive and thrive.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Lastly, there's my top stock to buy for April (which I happened to buy in March), robotic surgical system developer Intuitive Surgical (NASDAQ:ISRG).
Intuitive Surgical's moat in the assisted surgical space is insurmountable, in my view. The company ended 2019 with 5,582 installed da Vinci systems, which is far more than all of its competitors combined. When coupled with the price of these systems ($0.5 million to $2.5 million) and the training given to surgeons, there's almost no chance of customer churn.
It's also a company that simply gets better with age. Built as a razor-and-blades business model, Intuitive Surgical generates the bulk of its margins from selling instruments with each procedure and servicing its installed da Vinci systems. As the number of installed systems grows, so will the company's operating margins.



When investing geniuses David and Tom Gardner have a stock tip, it can pay to listen. After all, the newsletter they have run for over a decade, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has quadrupled the market.*
David and Tom just revealed what they believe are the ten best stocks for investors to buy right now¡¦ and Amazon.com, Inc. made the list -- but there are 9 other stocks you may be overlooking.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


