
Everybody likes getting paid.
And since ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) is one of the most profitable companies in the world, it stands to reason that it pays a great dividend. Since the merger that created the megacompany in 1999, its annual dividend has more than tripled:

XOM DIVIDEND DATA BY YCHARTS.
However, that doesn't mean ExxonMobil is the best dividend payer in the oil patch. With that in mind, we asked three of our energy experts to name a company with better dividends than ExxonMobil, and they came back with three very different companies that do very different things, in ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP), ONEOK (NYSE:OKE), and HollyFrontier (NYSE:HFC).
Here's what our experts had to say:

COP DIVIDEND DATA BY YCHARTS.
ONEOK owns 41% of and is the general partner of ONEOK Partners (NYSE:OKS), a master limited partnership that owns one of the best-located natural gas and natural gas liquids collection, processing, storage, and distribution systems in the U.S. As a midstream operator, ONEOK (through ONEOK Partners) is primarily about moving the product to market, and letting other companies take on the potential risk (and reward) of finding and producing natural gas and natural gas liquids.
The company does generate about one-third of its income from commodities (mainly NGLs), but uses hedges to limit the downside for the majority of its sales here. When prices shoot up, these hedges can limit profits, but they serve an important role in minimizing losses when oil prices collapse.
For income seekers, ONEOK is built to pay for the long term. The company just increased its dividend by 3%, and will pay $2.42 per share on an annualized basis. That's good for nearly a 6% yield at recent prices, 90% higher than the yield on ExxonMobil stock:
OKE DIVIDEND YIELD (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS.
Best of all, the nature of its business should produce long-term and relatively predictable income from its contracts. That will likely lead to increasing payouts for years to come, and at what I think should be a higher rate of dividend growth than ExxonMobil is likely to produce.


Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


