Qatar made headlines recently after the long-standing OPEC member said that it was leaving the group of oil-exporting nations at the end of the year. That will drop OPEC's membership roll down to 14, although as the 11th largest producer in the group, Qatar's exit will only impact OPEC's production by about 2%.
While Qatar isn't a major oil exporter, it's the world leader in liquified natural gas (LNG). It's leaving the oil-focused OPEC so that it can turn the bulk of its attention to not only its top commodity, but a cleaner-burning fuel source that's growing increasingly important to meeting global energy demand.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Qatar was the first new country to join OPEC, becoming a member about a year after five nations founded the organization in 1960. However, about a decade later, the country discovered a massive gas field off its northeast coast, dubbed North Field.
Qatar drilled several wells to appraise that field over the next 14 years, which proved that it was sitting on the world's largest non-associated gas field (meaning there's no oil). Overall, the North Field holds about 10% of the world's known gas reserves and makes Qatar the third-largest holder of natural gas resources behind Russia and Iran.
Since the small Middle Eastern nation doesn't need that gas, it has spent the past several decades building out the world's largest LNG export business. The country currently has the capacity to produce 77 million tonnes of LNG per year, which represented 26% of global LNG trade in 2017. Meanwhile, Qatar is working to expand its LNG business up to 110 million tons per year by 2023.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Even with that significant capacity increase by Qatar, the global LNG market could still run short of supplies by the middle of the next decade given the fast-paced demand growth from places like China and India. Overall, worldwide gas demand is expected to expand 46% by 2035 from 2017's level, according to a forecast by energy industry analysts at Wood Mackenzie.
For comparison's sake, Wood Mackenzie sees oil demand only increasing 14% over that time frame while renewables expand 18% by 2035. What's fueling that fast-paced growth? Gas is cheaper than renewables while cleaner than oil, making it an ideal alternative to meet demand while being mindful of climate change risks. That fast-paced demand growth for gas is leading Qatar to make investments outside of its home country to bolster its LNG franchise.
Qatar is looking to expand in the U.S. where it owns a majority stake in the Golden Pass LNG Terminal in TX along with minority owners ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP). The head of Qatar Petroleum, which is a state-owned energy company, stated earlier this year that the country is "looking very critically at the United States because we have a position there," noting that it expects to make a final investment decision on a $10 billion expansion of Golden Pass LNG by the end of this year.
However, Qatar Petroleum's CEO noted that his company doesn't just want to operate the LNG infrastructure but would also like to link it with upstream investments in the U.S. that it would buy to supply that project with gas. As such, it's currently evaluating partnership opportunities to invest in shale gas developments in the U.S.
In addition to the U.S, Qatar is investing in several projects around the world, including ones in Brazil, Argentina, and Mexico. It's also considering investments in several other countries such as Mozambique, for example, where ExxonMobil and Anadarko Petroleum (NYSE:APC) are developing LNG export facilities. In Anadarko's case, it could make a final investment decision on its Mozambique project sometime next year. Both companies still are seeking financing for their projects, which might open the door for Qatar to join one of them as a partner.
Qatar sees a much brighter future for natural gas than it does with oil, which is why it's leaving OPEC. That will free up the country to not only expand its LNG operations supporting the North Field, but invest in LNG projects around the world.
That shift toward natural gas and LNG by not only the soon-to-be-former OPEC member but large-scale oil giants like Exxon, ConocoPhillips, and Anadarko is something investors should keep an eye on since it could enable these energy companies to grow at a much faster rate than their oil-focused peers in the decades ahead. That could give their stocks more fuel to reward investors over the long term. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


If you're in the market for cheap stocks at a time when the stock market is still near all-time highs, then you need to think outside the box. Although dating company Match Group (NASDAQ:MTCH), biotech Celgene (NASDAQ:CELG), and energy giant ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) may not all show up on your typical value screens, they appear to have a desirable combination of stock price and opportunity ahead of them (and Exxon adds a fat dividend yield, too). Take a close look and at least one may entice you to do a deeper dive.
Brian Stoffel (Match Group): It might seem absurd to claim that a stock trading for 35 times trailing earnings is a value. But in Match Group -- the parent company to Match.com, Tinder, OkCupid, and a host of other dating services -- I believe we have an anomaly. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Match has made almost $500 million in free cash flow over the past year. That puts the company's price-to-free cash flow ratio at a much more reasonable 24. Over the next year, the company is expected to grow non-GAAP earnings per share by 31% to $1.62. Today's price tag is only 25 times that value.
If that doesn't convince you that Match might be a value stock, consider its blueprint for success, which has already been put to good use:
Pulling this off isn't as easy as I'm making it sound, and I'm not a huge fan of Match's recently announced special dividend, but the dynamics are there to make today's prices seem like a real value. Admittedly, I don't own shares in my portfolio, but I have given the stock an outperform rating in my All-Star CAPS portfolio.
Keith Speights (Celgene): When you think of value stocks, biotechs typically don't come to mind. However, there's one big biotech stock that is dirt cheap right now -- Celgene. This stock trades at a little over seven times expected earnings. And its price-to-earnings-to-growth (PEG) ratio is a ridiculously low 0.42.
What's the catch with Celgene? The company is heavily dependent on blood cancer drug Revlimid, which generates around 63% of Celgene's total revenue. Revlimid faces limited-volume generic competition by March 2022. Celgene's patents for the drug are also being challenged in court. A loss would open the door to generic competition much sooner.
This reliance on Revlimid means that Celgene really needs pipeline successes to offset future revenue loss. Celgene has experienced a couple of big pipeline setbacks over the last 14 months that rattled investors, with disappointing late-stage clinical results for once-promising Crohn's disease drug GED-0301 and the FDA refusing to consider an approval application for multiple sclerosis drug ozanimod.
However, Celgene should soon resubmit for approval of ozanimod. The biotech's pipeline also includes four other drugs with blockbuster sales potential that could reach the market by 2020. Celgene has even more potential winners on the way in the following years.
There's still a risk that Celgene could lose its Revlimid litigation or see more pipeline setbacks. But I think the odds are in its favor, making this biotech a value stock worth buying at current prices.
Reuben Gregg Brewer (ExxonMobil): Giant, integrated energy company Exxon is offering income investors a 4.1% yield today. That's the highest level since roughly the late 1990s. The company's price to tangible book value, meanwhile, is lower than it has been since about that same time period. Exxon looks very cheap today.
The knocks against the energy producer are starting to look less material. For example, Exxon's production has been falling for a couple of years, but grew sequentially between the second and third quarters of 2018. The reason for the improvement is that drilling in the onshore U.S. market is starting to produce results. And that's just one of the company's major investments that's expected to come on line between now and 2025. 

XOM DIVIDEND YIELD (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS.
That said, recently falling oil prices have been another headwind. But here's the interesting thing: Exxon's spending plans are fairly robust, with the company projecting that it can increase earnings by 35% in 2025 even if oil prices fall to $40 per barrel. (At $80 per barrel, earnings grow by 225%.) And with long-term debt at less than 10% of the capital structure, there's little worry that Exxon can afford its investment program, which is large relative to peers even if oil prices are weak.   
It looks like short-term investors are punishing Exxon for issues that will resolve over time. There are also early signs that the giant ship is starting to turn toward better days. Income investors should jump aboard before more people realize just how cheap Exxon looks right now.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


