ExxonMobil's (NYSE:XOM) management is getting chastised by Wall Street on a pretty regular basis. The continued decline in oil and gas production when oil prices are high is causing the company to test investors' patience. This most recent earnings report was another case of lackluster results that missed earnings expectations. 
Here's a look at the company's second-quarter performance and why management would much rather that you look at some of the things it has planned down the road instead of its recent string of disappointing results.
DATA SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL EARNINGS RELEASE.
This most recent earnings report feels very much like the prior quarter's. The company is realizing the benefits of higher oil prices, but production numbers continue to decline for various reasons. To make matters worse, ExxonMobil had a lot of scheduled downtime for maintenance in its downstream segment as well as for several of its oil sands facilities in Canada. 
If there is one good thing to pull from the report, it's that the company seems to be back on the right track in the U.S. in terms of profitability. Earnings in this particular segment have underperformed ever since management purchased XTO Energy back in 2010. Production from XTO was heavily weighted toward natural gas, which has been a tough business because of cheap prices across the U.S. So management has been letting natural gas production in the U.S. decline as it focuses on more oil reservoirs. With shale oil production from its Permian Basin and Bakken holdings growing 30% compared to this time last year, it is significantly improving returns for U.S. production.
DATA SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL EARNINGS RELEASE. CHART BY AUTHOR.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
In the company's press release, CEO Darren Woods highlighted some of Exxon's largest and most lucrative projects that he thinks will drive significant growth well into the next decade:
Key projects in Guyana, the U.S. Permian Basin, Brazil, Mozambique and Papua New Guinea are positioning us well to meet the objectives we outlined in our long-term earnings growth plans. The high quality of these resources, combined with our strengths in project execution and innovation, will generate strong value over time. Second quarter results were primarily impacted by significant scheduled maintenance undertaken to support operational integrity. In addition, while we were pleased with the return of full production following the [Papua New Guinea] earthquake, extended recoveries from first quarter operational incidents in the Downstream were disappointing. However, good progress was made during the second quarter in fully recovering from these incidents.
At Exxon's analyst meeting earlier this year, Woods and his team noted that these projects should triple upstream net income between now and 2025 at $60 a barrel. 

XOM DATA BY YCHARTS.
Aside from the additional headache of maintenance and downtime, this quarter feels an awful lot like the incredibly frustrating prior one. Right at a time when oil prices are rising, companies that were very good at cost control should be pulling in windfall profits. ExxonMobil is one of those very cost-conscious companies, but the declines in production -- either deliberate or because of project timing -- have held the business in check.
From a long-term investor's perspective, Exxon's value comes in the small handful of incredibly lucrative projects slated to go live between 2021 and 2025. Guyana, Mozambique LNG, and offshore Brazil are all high-return projects that look better and better by the day. Throw in accelerating production growth from U.S. shale and some sizable downstream investments, and there is a compelling case for Exxon's shares three to five years from now. The trade-off for investors is having to endure disappointing earnings results like these for the next few quarters while these projects materialize.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


France-based engineering design company Dassault Systemes (OTC:DASTY) delivered a good set of second-quarter earnings and upgraded full-year guidance. The company is seeing increased adoption of its 3DExperience platform, which allows users of Dassault's software to collaborate with other company functions as they create and develop products and solutions. And that increased adoption is, in turn, driving growth in new license sales for its engineering design software. Let's look at the earnings report:
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The company reports in euros, and this year switched to International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) under International Accounting Standards (IAS) 18.
For the sake of clarity, I'm using the non-IFRS, IAS 18 numbers throughout because this is what management is currently giving guidance to. (You can think of the non-IFRS numbers in the same way that U.S. companies report non-GAAP earnings.) Also, note that Dassault generated around 57% of its revenue outside Europe in 2017, so currency movements can bounce its earnings around a lot.
Starting with the headline numbers from the quarter:
The headline numbers were within guidance ranges, and management was moved to raise full-year guidance. The increase is down to stronger growth, favorable exchange-rate movements, and the acquisitions of Centric Software (product life-cycle management software for the fashion industry)  and No Magic (model-based system engineering).
Turning to the specific full-year headline guidance numbers:
The 0.12-euro increase in full-year guidance includes 0.03 euros apiece from a better-than-expected tax rate and currency movements, with higher activity accounting for 0.07 euros, while Centric is guided to reduce full-year EPS by 0.01 euro. 
There are two key numbers to follow with Dassault, and both of them look good.
The first is its growth in new license sales -- the key to future subscription and support revenue. As you can see below, new licenses revenue grew 8% in the second quarter. It's a good result considering that Dassault's new license sales are becoming more back-end loaded.
DATA SOURCE: DASSAULT SYSTEMES PRESENTATIONS. CHART BY AUTHOR.
Management is forecasting 9% to 11% growth in licenses in constant currency for 2018. And by the looks of the first two quarters, it's well on track.
The second metric to follow is how Dassault is generating revenue growth from its 3DExperience platform. The good news is that CEO Bernard Charles outlined strong growth from the platform: "We are seeing strong momentum with 3DExperience, with new licenses revenue up 27% in constant currencies, and accounting for one-third of related sales of the 2018 first half."
That confirms that customers are now readily adopting the platform and building on the momentum started in 2017. Indeed, Charles highlighted EDF Group (one of the largest electricity producers in the world) and ExxonMobil as two leading companies adopting 3DExperience.
Dassault is making good progress with convincing customers to adopt the 3DExperience platform, and all its major software solutions achieved double-digit licenses growth in constant currency in the quarter. Provided the global economy holds up, it's reasonable to expect more of the same from Dassault in the second half.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


