
IMAGE SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL INVESTOR PRESENTATION.
Very rarely do the words "safe" and "oil stocks" go together. Not because oil investments are a way to lose money, but because people vastly underestimate the volatility of those investments and turn a temporary downturn in the market into a bad investment because they sell at probably the worst time possible. The chances that the price of oil will move significantly over the next year are about as good as you having a birthday. However, if you define a safe investment as something that you can put your money in over a decade long time horizon, then the chances of finding a safe investment in oil go up significantly. 
With the world needing oil for quite some time, companies with the massive scale to develop the next great oil field, the companies with the infrastructure to move that oil to market, and the companies that will provide the equipment to fuel the development of those new oil fields will likely do very well over this period. That is why companies such as ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), Magellan Midstream Partners (NYSE:MMP), and National Oilwell Varco (NYSE:NOV) could be some of the safest investments in the oil space today. Here's why.
ExxonMobil: Big Oil companies have a lot of competitive advantages that make them some of the safer investments in the oil industry. Their sheer size alone gives them immense economies of scale that help drive down costs, and their history as stable investments has allowed them to access cheap capital with credit ratings better than most governments. Also, the integrated model of owning production, refining, and retail arms help to smooth out earnings. When oil prices are high, the production side of the business will do great things while the refining sector likely won't. Conversely, low oil prices will be a boom for the refining division while production's performance will be less than stellar. With such a volatile commodity market to deal with, having both sides of the oil coin can provide a safety net for investors.

SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL INVESTOR PRESENTATION.
There is quite possibly no company that personifies this level of safety and stability like ExxonMobil. With a market capitalization of $366 billion, the company enjoys economies of scale that few companies can replicate. Also, its AAA credit rating gives it access to some of the cheapest debt out there, making it much easier for the company to finance new large scale projects. Not that it needs to, though, because for years ExxonMobil has generated more than enough cash from its operations to cover its capital expenditures as well as pay a hefty dividend and repurchase shares. The company will still go through some ups and downs as oil prices swing back and forth, but the company is built to handle it and provide shareholders with a long-term wealth-building machine.
Magellan Midstream Partners: One of the safer investments in any part of the oil and gas market is in the pipelines that transport those products from source to refinery to end market. These pipelines traditionally generate revenue on long-term fixed-fee contracts that have little connection to the actual price of oil itself. Not only does Magellan benefit greatly from this sort of revenue stability -- about 85% of Magellan's operating margin comes from fixed-fee contracts -- but a large part of that pipeline network is actually a regulated monopoly because much of its petroleum pipeline network is the only provider of petroleum products in certain regions of the country. Like utilities of old that had little to no competition, Magellan is pretty much guaranteed returns on large portions of its network.

SOURCE: MAGELLAN MIDSTREAM PARTNERS INVESTOR PRESENTATION.
On top of that, Magellan is one of the few master limited partnerships that holds an investment grade credit rating, which -- like ExxonMobil -- gives it access to much cheaper financing than many of its competitors in the pipeline business. The combination of a stable earnings base to budget future growth as well as access to cheap capital in order to finance it has allowed Magellan to throw off tons of extra cash to shareholders through distributions. Over the past 14 years the company's distribution to shareholders has grown 13% annually and shows no signs of slowing down. You can't ask for much more safety than that in an investment.
National Oilwell Varco: If you were to look at the stock price of National Oilwell Varco over the past several months, you might not think that this company should qualify as a safe oil investment. After all, shares have declined by 40% since their highs back in September and the oil market really started to take a turn for the worse. However, one thing that National Oilwell Varco has proven over the years is that it has handled down markets better than just about every other oil services company thanks to a large backlog of orders and a recurring revenue stream from selling replacement parts for its equipment that is out on the job. Over the past 9 years -- a period where we have seen two major downturn in the energy market -- National Oilwell Varco has more than quadrupled its EBITDA.

SOURCE: NATIONAL OILWELL VARCO INVESTOR PRESENTATION.
There is no doubt that the downturn in oil prices and the subsequent downturn in drilling activity and capital spending will impact National Oilwell Varco's earnings to a certain degree, but its $10 billion in backlog orders will help to bridge the gap until the market picks back up again and companies will need to spend on either new equipment or simply replacing parts. When that does happen, the company will be ready.
What a Fool believes
There are no guarantees in investing. There are just way too many unforeseeable challenges out there that we can't quantify. This is especially true in the world of oil because it is such a complex web of moving parts that predicting where oil prices will go is a complete waste of time. However, those with the ability to look beyond the short-term undulations of the oil market and identify great companies will likely find safe havens for building wealth over the long term, and investing in ExxonMobil, Magellan Midstream Partners, and National Oilwell Varco are a great start. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Oil prices have plunged 40% in the past year, inflicting serious damage on the stocks of Big Oil dividend payers including Petrobras (NYSE:PBR), ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), and Chevron (NYSE:CVX).
PBR DATA BY YCHARTS.
However, despite its share price falling the furthest, there are five reasons why long-term investors should avoid investing in the flailing value trap that is Petrobras: rampant corruption, enormous losses, outrageous debt, terrible capital allocation, and an abysmal dividend growth track record. Just to name a few.
Petrobras: Den of corruption 
One of Petrobras' biggest problems is malfeasance on a grand scale. Over the past year the Brazilian national oil company -- the government owns 54% of shares -- has been roiled by the worst corruption scandal in the nation's history. 
In November 2014, 23 high-profile politicians were arrested, with far more under suspicion of flagrant corruption that might rise to even the level of Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff, who is accused of skimming 3% of the company's contracts for herself. 
All told, Brazilian prosecutors are investigating over 750 company projects, and in the third quarter of 2014 the company took a $2.527 billion writedown directly tied to corruption. The scandal has engulfed the company to such an extent that in February Rousseff fired Petrobras' entire management team. 
Staggering losses
In the past two quarters Petrobras has written off over $19 billion -- including $16.7 billion in the fourth quarter alone -- 70% of which was tied to corruption-linked refining projects. This resulted in almost $12 billion in losses over that six-month period. 
Compare this to Exxon and Chevron, which -- despite the oil crash -- recorded net profit of $8.4 billion and $3.8 billion, respectfully, over the same time period. Part of the reason Exxon and Chevron can generate large profits despite low oil prices is another major advantage they have over Petrobras: far more efficient use of capital. 
PBR RETURN ON EQUITY (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS.
As this chart shows, not only is Petrobras far worse at allocating investors' capital -- not surprising given the billions of dollars lost to corruption over the years -- but over the past five years the pace at which its capital efficiency has declined has been far worse than that of either American company, despite oil prices that were at historically high levels of about $100 per barrel.
Monstrous debt load
Petrobras is the most indebted and least profitable publicly traded oil company on Earth, with total debt of $132.2 billion -- up 16%, or $17.83 billion, in the last year alone.  
Compare that to Exxon's and Chevron's respective $32.8 billion and $27.8 billion total debt loads. 
When you consider how much larger Exxon and Chevron are compared to Petrobras, the differences in debt is stunning. For example, look at these three companies' debt-to-market cap ratios:
Not only is Petrobras -- adjusted for relative market cap -- 16.2 and 23.3 times more leveraged than Chevron and Exxon, respectively, but up until recently the company continued to profligately borrow far more than its American competitors as it strove to invest $220.6 billion into growth projects between 2014 and 2018. 
PBR NET DEBT ISSUANCE (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS.
With oil prices so depressed, the company won't come close to achieving this goal because lending markets won't loan it that much. Indeed, management has announced that it would issue a new 2015-2019 investment plan that focuses on controlling debt, and could result in a delay of its annual dividend.
However, even if the company cuts its investment plan in half, its inability to allocate capital efficiently means it might destroy a significant amount of shareholder value.
Another problem with Petrobras' debt is that the company receives revenue in Brazilian reals, but 72%, or $95.2 billion, of its debt is in U.S. dollars, and 50% of its debt has floating interest rates. So a strengthening dollar effectively increases the cost of the company's debt and interest payments, as will rising U.S. interest rates. This will make it harder to improve the profitability of the projects that its debt is supposedly funding. 
Terrible dividend track record
 
PBR DIVIDEND DATA BY YCHARTS.
Studies show that consistently growing dividends can greatly help a company's long-term performance. Petrobras has a terrible track record when it comes to increasing its dividend, particularly compared to Chevron and Exxon.
The takeaway
With oil prices having plunged precipitously and in danger of remaining weak for years, I don't expect Petrobas will return to profitability anytime soon, particularly with the threat of future corruption related-writedowns looming. While speculators might be attracted to Petrobras as a short-term oil rebound play, for long-term income investors I think ExxonMobil and Chevron clearly make far better alternatives.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


