If you are a dividend investor, the current low interest rate environment has probably been very frustrating. There are high yielding stocks around, of course, but they're often backed by struggling and/or financially weak companies. Investing in dividend stocks for the long-term means finding the right mix of yield, financial strength, and long-term opportunity.
If you're looking for healthy, long-term dividend stocks, there are three names that should be on your watch list: integrated oil giant ExxonMobil Corporation (NYSE:XOM), food maker Hormel Foods Corporation (NYSE:HRL), and senior housing owner Welltower Inc. (NYSE:WELL). Here's a quick rundown on each.
Exxon has some issues to deal with, which has caused investors to push the company's shares lower even as stronger performing peers have seen notable stock gains. But now the oil giant's yield is up over 4%, toward the high end of its historical range. And its price to tangible book value is lower than it has been since the 1980s. The company looks like it's trading at value levels today.
YOU CAN BUILD YOUR NEST EGG WITH THIS TRIO OF BARGAIN PRICED DIVIDEND PAYERS. IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
The company's falling production and weak returns on invested capital relative to historical results are very real problems. That said, Exxon has plans to address them both: On the production front, the company is ramping up capital spending on key energy projects, including onshore U.S. oil and gas drilling, offshore oil in Guyana and Brazil, and natural gas in Mozambique. To help improve its returns it's taking control of more of its investments so it can leverage its expertise in successfully running large projects.
It will take time to turn this ship, but with a $330 billion market cap that shouldn't be much of a surprise. In the meantime, however, investors can add a high yield stock with a long track record of rewarding investors. To put a number on that, Exxon has increased its dividend every year for 36 consecutive years despite operating in a highly cyclical industry. In other words, it's been through tough times before -- and the dividend has not only held, but continued to rise. This time isn't likely to be any different.
Hormel is probably best known for making SPAM, a processed food product that you'll find in the center of any grocery store. The only problem is that shoppers are increasingly shifting to the periphery of the store to buy fresher and healthier products. This has left investors downbeat on food makers like Hormel, and its dividend is currently a touch over 2%, toward the high end of its historical range.
Hormel, however, has a strong history of shifting with the times. Most recently it has been selling off brands like Diamond salt that aren't compelling growth opportunities, and buying brands like Wholly Guacamole and Columbus deli products that resonate more with consumers. It has also been expanding globally, with investments in China and South America. International is just a modest part of the company's business today, but holds great promise as a growth engine.
HORMEL'S COLUMBUS ACQUISITION INCREASES ITS FOOTPRINT IN THE STORE AND ACROSS THE COUNTRY. IMAGE SOURCE: HORMEL FOODS COMPANY
Hormel has increased its dividend every year for 52 years. Moreover, even after a number of relatively large acquisitions to support growth, its debt levels remain modest, with long-term debt making up just 10% of its capital structure. Debt to EBITDA, meanwhile, is less than 0.5 (for reference, Kraft Heinz's debt to EBITDA is over 4). Hormel's stock is rarely cheap, but the relatively high yield suggests it is fairly priced today if you can wait for it to work through the current industrywide issues.
Last up is Welltower, a real estate investment trust, or REIT, that focuses on owning senior housing facilities. The issue here is a mismatch between long-term, demographically driven demand and current supply.
The big picture is that Baby Boomers are set to expand the ranks of those aged 65 and up, in the United States and around the world. This will inevitably lead to greater demand for senior housing. It's not a matter of if this will happen; the demographics of the situation mean it is a question of when.
But this isn't a secret, and healthcare property developers have been building in anticipation of demand. That's made it harder to fill up existing properties and raise rents. Investors have pushed Welltower shares lower in response, lifting the yield to a very generous 6.6%.

WELL DATA BY YCHARTS
Welltower's properties, however, continue to perform reasonably well. In fact, the REIT expects rents from its current roster of properties to rise by 1% to 2% this year. That's partly because the company focuses on owning properties in high-barrier-to-entry markets -- in and around major U.S. cities, for example. And while occupancy declined in the fourth quarter of 2017, that was largely driven by an increase in so-called "move outs" because of a tough flu season. Welltower should easily refill those rooms over time, with rent hikes offsetting the impact on revenues.
This REIT is one of the largest healthcare property owners, and has a long history of excellence behind it. It's also increased its dividend every year for 14 consecutive years. With shares down by roughly a third since the start of 2015, long-term investors looking for big yields have a value-priced opportunity here.
These are three very different companies in three very different industries. If you do a deep dive on this trio, I'm sure you'll find a stock you like enough to add to your dividend portfolio. Exxon, Hormel, and Welltower are, indeed, facing some problems today -- which is why you can pick them up at bargain prices. But they have long histories of success and are financially strong. Given enough time, the long-term opportunities ahead of them will be worth the wait... and you can collect the dividends all along the way.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


ExxonMobil Corporation (NYSE:XOM) is going against the grain with plans to materially increase its capital spending over the next five years. Peers like Chevron Corporation, which recently announced that 2018 would be its fourth consecutive year of falling capital spending, are generally going in the opposite direction.
Here's why Exxon is spending more, and a look at whether or not it can afford its ambitious spending and its dividend at the same time.
One of the biggest issues facing Exxon today is falling production in its upstream business -- it dropped 1% in 2016 and 1.7% in 2017. Those are small numbers, to be sure, but they are going the wrong direction. If it doesn't stabilize or increase its production, its business is effectively shrinking over time. And with oil prices heading higher, it is basically missing out on an opportunity to make larger profits.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
To that end, Exxon has been looking for projects in which to invest so it can start growing its production again. It has successfully lined up a host of big oil and natural gas deals that should provide it with material growth opportunities, including plans to invest in onshore U.S. oil and gas, deepwater oil in Guyana and Brazil, and gas production in Mozambique. And it has plans to expand its downstream operations in refining and chemicals on top of that.
All of this will cost money. In 2018 Exxon's capital spending plan will require $24 billion, up roughly $1 billion from 2017. Spending in 2019 jumps to $28 billion, and for the three years after that will be as much as $30 billion. That's a lot of money out the door, especially for a company that paid out roughly $13 billion to investors in 2017 in the form of dividends. Can Exxon afford to support the dividend and its capital spending plans?
In 2017 the oil giant's dividends and growth spending were covered by cash flow, but that required a little help from asset sales. With higher prices, however, 2018 has gotten off to a stronger start. Capital spending and dividends cost roughly $8.2 billion in the first quarter, with cash flow of about $10 billion. That $10 billion includes $1.4 billion of asset sales, which can't be counted on every quarter but remain a key part of Exxon's plan as it prunes assets to better focus its business -- and raise much needed cash.
EXXON'S FIRST QUARTER RESULTS SUMMARY. IMAGE SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL CORPORATION 
Oil prices have continued to rise this year, which is clearly making it easier for Exxon to cover its spending plans. So long as oil prices remain steady or move higher, Exxon has a cushion. Higher oil prices should also make it easier for the company to get top dollar for any divestments it makes.
That said, there's another place for Exxon to find cash: its balance sheet. The company's long-term debt rose dramatically during the oil downturn that started in mid-2014, going from $6.5 billion at the end of 2013 to a peak of $27.7 billion at the end of 2016. It dropped to roughly $23 in 2017 as the company used improved oil prices to pare its debt load.
However, even at the peak in 2016, long-term debt only accounted for around 15% of the company's capital structure. That's relatively high for Exxon, but not high relative to the broader integrated oil peer group. Take a look at the graph below --Exxon's debt to equity ratio is way down at the bottom, and by a wide margin compared to some of its European peers. In other words, Exxon can always rely on its balance sheet to carry it through on the spending front.

XOM FINANCIAL DEBT TO EQUITY (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS
However, don't forget about the impact of the company's spending. Although you can't actually predict how an oil project is going to play out in the real world, the drawing board plans look very promising. For example, Exxon's reserves increased 6% in 2017 based on its exploration efforts. Assuming it can turn that into additional oil production, higher sales volumes will also be a part of the mix. And that will provide even more cushion for the dividend.
Clearly, Exxon's spending plans are going to cost a lot money. However, if oil prices remain strong it looks like Exxon can cover its dividend and capital spending needs. That may require additional asset sales along the way, but pruning the portfolio is not a bad thing or unusual. And if there's a shortfall in a given year, the integrated oil giant still has a very strong balance sheet to fall back on.
Meanwhile, if you assume it is successful in its drilling efforts, rising production will also help out. It might not be pretty every quarter or year, but Exxon appears to be financially capable of maintaining its dividend despite its ambitious growth plans. Concerned investors are pushing Exxon's stock lower, and its yield up over 4%. This looks like a buying opportunity for patient, long-term investors.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


