Turbulence has returned to the oil market over the past few months as oil prices have come well off their peak from last October. That's having a noticeable impact on the operations and earnings of most oil companies, including Hess (NYSE:HES
), which lost money during the fourth quarter.
That volatility led CEO John Hess to remind investors on the accompanying conference call about the company's five strategic priorities, which set it apart from most peers.
CEO Hess started his prepared remarks by stating that the company "invest[s] only in high-return low-cost opportunities." Because of that focus, the company plans to allocate 75% of its capital spending on just two regions through at least 2025 -- Guyana and the Bakken -- since they're "two of the highest return investment opportunities in the industry." That focus on investing for returns instead of merely growing production sets Hess apart from most peers.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Hess then stated that:
We've built a focused portfolio with a combination of short-cycle and long-cycle investment opportunities, with Guyana and Bakken as our growth engines and the deepwater Gulf of Mexico and the Gulf of Thailand as our cash engines ... our portfolio is positioned to deliver approximately 20% compound annual cash flow growth and more than 10% compound annual production growth through 2025, with a portfolio breakeven of less than $40 per barrel Brent [the global oil price benchmark] by 2025.
The company has narrowed its focus to four regions to drive growth going forward. The cash engines of the company are its positions in the Gulf of Mexico and the Gulf of Thailand. Hess intends on using the cash produced from those regions to fuel its growth engines, which include its short-term growth opportunities in the Bakken, as well as its longer-term development in Guyana. These four engines should combine to generate double-digit production and cash flow growth all the way through at least 2025.
The CEO then noted that the company's third strategic priority is to ensure that it has the "financial capacity to fund our world-class investment opportunities and maintain an investment-grade credit rating." He pointed out that the company entered the year in a solid position since it had $2.6 billion of cash on its balance sheet and hedges in place on more than a third of its anticipated production that locked in a price of $60 a barrel.
Further, he noted that even though the company plans to boost its budget 40%, to $2.9 billion this year, it has the "flexibility to reduce our capital program by up to $1 billion should oil prices move lower on a sustained basis." Those factors put the company in a solid financial position to navigate through the recent oil price volatility.
Hess continued by saying that "we are focused on growing free cash flow in a disciplined and reliable manner." He noted that while 2019 will be a heavy investment year for the company, "we are at an exciting inflection point." Hess will transition to a "free cash flow generation phase beginning in 2020 with the start up of the Liza Phase 1 development offshore Guyana, followed by the Bakken growing to 200,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day in 2021 and then, the Liza Phase 2 start up offshore Guyana by mid-2022, with an additional ship planned in Guyana for each year thereafter through 2025."
Instead of growing as fast as it can, Hess plans to take a disciplined approach by expanding in phases over the next several years so that it can maintain its financial strength, as well as the flexibility to adjust to market conditions, as needed.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Finally, Hess concluded by stating that "as our portfolio generates increasing free cash flow, we will prioritize return of capital to shareholders through dividend and opportunistic share repurchases." Hess recently completed a $1.5 billion share-repurchase program that it initiated in late 2017 and then increased early last year, which it funded with asset sales.
However, with 2019 being a key investment year, the company likely won't return any more money to shareholders above its current dividend, which it hasn't increased since 2013. That will likely change in 2020 as the company hits its cash flow inflection point, which could allow the oil producer to boost its dividend, as well as authorize another share-repurchase program.
Check out the latest Hess earnings call transcript.
While oil prices have changed dramatically over the past few months, Hess' strategic priorities haven't. The company plans to use its four engines to drive cash flow higher in the coming years, which should enable it to start returning more money to shareholders as early as next year.
This outlook makes Hess a compelling oil stock to consider buying for the long haul since it can deliver high-octane cash flow growth and increasing cash returns to investors, even if oil prices don't improve from their current level.



Before you consider Hess Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Hess Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


January has been a strong month for the stock market, with most major indices rebounding sharply from their late 2018 slump. However, there are still some compelling bargains to be found.
Here's why five of our contributors think Synchrony Financial (NYSE:SYF
), Hess (NYSE:HES
), IBM (NYSE:IBM
), Amazon.com (NASDAQ:AMZN
), and Booking Holdings (NASDAQ:BKNG
) are some of the best stocks to buy in February.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Matt Frankel, CFP (Synchrony Financial): Synchrony Financial is a leader in both store credit cards and high-yield online savings accounts, and its business is firing on all cylinders. Loan balances grew by 14% over the past year, and the bank's efficiency and 16% net interest margin would make most financial institutions jealous.
In addition, Synchrony investors just got answers to two big lingering questions stemming from the loss of Walmart as a co-branding partner in mid-2018.
First, it was just revealed that Sam's Club will continue to be a Synchrony partner. That makes the loss of Walmart a bit more palatable, as it's certainly easier to replace lost revenue from one major partner instead of two. Second, and perhaps more significantly, Walmart agreed to drop the $800 million lawsuit it had filed against Synchrony, which was alleging mismanagement of the co-branded credit card product.
As a result of these two developments, and because it's selling its Walmart loan portfolio to Capital One, Synchrony is releasing about $500 million in loss reserves, which can now be used to help grow the business.
Check out the latest Synchrony Financial earnings call transcript.
The best part is that even after the post-news pop, Synchrony trades for just 6.8 times forward earnings, so this highly profitable financial institution is still a compelling bargain.
Todd Campbell (Hess): Oil prices nosedived in the final months of 2018, thanks to greater supply that resulted from allowing countries to import crude from Iran, and oil stocks crashed as a result. There's no telling where oil prices are heading from here, but some of these energy stocks are offering investors an intriguing opportunity to buy, including Hess.
This company is a few years into a major restructuring that's included ditching mature, slow-growing fields in places like the North Sea, spinning off infrastructure assets, paying down debt, cutting costs, and ramping up production in the Bakken Shale.
Check out the latest Hess earnings call transcript.
A decision to increase the number of rigs operating in the profit-friendly Bakken helped production there to increase to an average 118,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day (boepd) in Q3 from 103,000 in the same quarter in 2017. Hess thinks Bakken production will exceed 135,000 boepd in 2019 and that it could reach 200,000 by 2021. If that happens, it would translate into $1 billion in free cash flow annually for the company beyond 2020, at $60-per-barrel West Texas Intermediate prices.
An even bigger opportunity for Hess may exist offshore from Guyana, where it owns 30% of the Stabroek block, a massive field with 5 billion discovered barrels of oil equivalent that should enter production in 2020. Production there and in the Bakken has Hess thinking it can grow production by over 10% compounded annually through 2025.
The increasing production and cost controls that are expected to lower Hess' breakeven point to $40 per barrel (Brent) has the company forecasting compounded annual cash flow growth of 20% through 2025. 
Overall, Hess has a shot at seeing its financials improve significantly over the next few years, and given that its shares have tumbled 28% from its peak last October, I'm thinking now's a great time to pick up some shares.
Tim Green (IBM): Shares of IBM surged after the century-old tech company reported its fourth-quarter results in January. IBM is still dealing with slumping revenue as it invests in cloud computing, artificial intelligence, blockchain, and other growth areas. But the stock was and still is priced for disaster, and the company's 2019 guidance shows that IBM is more resilient than the market seems to believe.
IBM expects to produce at least $13.90 in adjusted earnings per share in 2019, up from $13.81 in 2018, and around $12 billion of free cash flow. That guidance excludes the impact of the Red Hat acquisition, since the timing of the $34 billion deal set to close in the second half will have a meaningful impact on the company's results. IBM is able to grow earnings and produce solid free cash flow because of its key competitive advantages, including decades-long customer relationships, a broad portfolio of products and services, and a deeply embedded position in certain industries.
Check out the latest IBM earnings call transcript.
Shares of IBM trade for less than 10 times the company's earnings guidance, a multiple that bakes in a level of pessimism that just doesn't make any sense. The stock also sports a dividend yield of about 4.7%, and the company plans to keep growing the dividend after it closes on the Red Hat deal.
IBM has been a frustrating stock to own over the past few years. But the foundation is in place for the company to exit this era of revenue declines and return to sustainable growth. At less than 10 times earnings, the stock is a steal.
Chris Neiger (Amazon.com): Amazon's soaring share price over the past few years has probably kept some investors away from this stellar company. But now that the share price has dropped about 8% over the past three months, a fantastic buying opportunity has opened up for those who've been waiting on the sidelines.
Not only are the company's shares trading at somewhat of a discount to the stock's high four months ago, but Amazon's core businesses also continue to fire on all cylinders, and its expansion into new markets, including advertising, could bring the company even more sales growth.
Amazon's business has benefited from its dominance in the e-commerce market. Nearly 49% of all online sales in the U.S. are made on the company's platform, and its online dominance continues to grow. Consider that Amazon now has more than 100 million Prime members, and it's estimated that more than half of all U.S. households will have a Prime membership by the end of this year. The significance of Amazon's Prime memberships is best understood when you know that these members spend, on average, about $800 more on the company's platform each year than non-Prime members do.
But Amazon's opportunities are expanding beyond e-commerce, of course. Amazon has wisely found a new way to turn its retail prowess into an entirely new business by benefiting from ad sales on its platform. Last year, Amazon became the third largest U.S. digital advertising platform in the U.S., with 4% of the market. Amazon's share is expected to reach 7% by the end of 2020, and about three years from now the company's advertising sales have the potential to top $22 billion, up from just $4 billion in 2017.
Check out the latest Amazon earnings call transcript.
Amazon's booming advertising business shows just how well the company can take one success -- a dominant e-commerce platform -- and turn it into another big win. The company has proved over and over again that it can't be boxed into traditional markets, and with Amazon's shares now cheaper than they've been in months, it might be the right time to invest in this massive disrupter.
Brian Feroldi (Booking Holdings): The name "Booking Holdings" might not ring a bell, but the odds are good that you know this company's brands. This online travel giant owns a number of leading properties that include Priceline.com, RentalCars.com, Kayak.com, Agoda.com, OpenTable, Booking.com, and more.
Booking Holdings has been a huge beneficiary of the gradual shift away from travel agents over the past couple of decades. The company's brands have become a trusted resource for millions of travelers from around the world who want to book a great vacation for an affordable price. That has driven outsize revenue and profit growth for many years. Better yet, the increased scale has allowed the company's margins to steadily increase, and long-term shareholders have been hugely rewarded. The stock is up 2,450% since 2009. 
Check out the latest Booking Holdings transcript.
The company's massive success has allowed it to grow into an $80 billion giant. However, even with its gargantuan size, Booking's sales and earnings are still growing at a brisk pace. Last quarter these numbers were 14% and 19%, respectively. Better yet, the company's strong growth rates should persist for years to come, since the online travel market is still growing and represents only a fraction of the total travel spending.
Wall Street believes Booking Holdings' profits will grow by more than 15% annually over the next five years. That's a blazing fast number for a business currently trading for less than 17 times forward earnings. That's why I'd be a happy buyer of Booking's stock today if it wasn't already one of my largest personal holdings.



Before you consider International Business Machines Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and International Business Machines Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


