Based on the aggregated intelligence of 180,000-plus investors participating in Motley Fool CAPS, the Fool's free investing community, integrated energy company Hess Corp. (NYSE: HES) has earned a respected four-star ranking.
With that in mind, let's take a closer look at Hess' business and see what CAPS investors are saying about the stock right now.
Hess facts
Sources: S&P Capital IQ and Motley Fool CAPS.
On CAPS, 97% of the 955 members who have rated Hess believe the stock will outperform the S&P 500 going forward.  
Just last week, one of those bulls, BlacknGold, tapped Hess as a timely bargain opportunity:
The market drastically overreacted to the slower than anticipated production increases in Bakken.
At the end of April, Bakken was producing 47,000 bpd, which Hess expects to expand to 52,000 bpd by year end. Furthermore, the company expects plateau production to be in the neighborhood of 80,000 bpd once all wells are developed.
The company increased income generated from its Asia gas production by $567 million in 1Q12 compared to the year ago period. This is a solid company that is creating value presented to you at a solid discount.   
If you want market-beating returns, you need to put together the best portfolio you can. Owning exceptional stocks is a surefire way to secure your financial future. Of course, despite its four-star rating, Hess may not be your top choice.
If that's the case, we've compiled a special free report for investors called "Secure Your Future With 9 Rock-Solid Dividend Stocks," which uncovers several other juicy income opportunities. The report is 100% free, but it won't be around forever, so click here to access it now.
Want to see how well (or not so well) the stocks in this series are performing? Follow the new TrackPoisedTo CAPS account.



Before you consider Hess Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Hess Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



