Creator of Christmastime truck toys and gigantic oil company Hess (NYSE:HES) is in a battle with legendary hedge fund Elliot Management, and so far it's benefiting both parties. As part of a reorganization, Elliot wants five seats on the board, in addition to Hess' own picks. In the meantime, the stock is up nearly 50% in the past year, and some analysts believe it's still undervalued by an additional 50%. With major changes on the horizon, should you take a closer look at Hess?
Focus!
Since amassing a sizable stake in the company, Elliot Management has been publicly critical of the company's management team and strategy. Lately, this has pushed the company to separate its chairman and executive into two different roles, as well as commit to being a pure-play exploration and production firm.
Still, Elliot remains unsatisfied with the company's efforts and has nominated five of its own directors to take seats on the board. Hess initially responded with offering two seats, which Elliot quickly discarded as a "PR Stunt."
Hess has had some operational trouble as of late, mainly the (according to Elliot) $800 million in "capital destruction" from the purchase and subsequent sale of Eagle Ford operations. The hedge fund claims the company hid the true numbers from shareholders via poor disclosure.
There is further support for Elliot's claims. Groups such as Citigroup and Morningstar have cited either Hess' inability to manage capital appropriately or Elliot's superior offering.
Elliot's five nominees are Rodney Chase, former deputy CEO of BP (NYSE:BP); Harvey Golub, former CEO of American Express; Karl Kurz, former COO of Anadarko; David McManus, former EVP of Pioneer; and Mark Smith, former CFO of Ultra. The five nominees undeniably bring a high level of expertise in their respected fields.
Will it happen?
Elliot seems to have quite a bit of momentum going into shareholder elections, and the company has already acquiesced to many of the fund's demands, whether they attribute it directly or not. Given that Hess already offered two board seats as a "please leave us alone" gesture, it may be that management fears Elliot has quite a bit of power of the company.
The election is set for Thursday, and a victory for Elliot will probably send shares higher, but some say the stock remains tremendously undervalued.
Value talk
At the London Value Investor Conference, British investor Michael Price made a bullish case for Hess. In short, he believes Elliot will be victorious, that John Hess will step down from his 17-year tenure at the company, that nonperforming assets will be sold off, and that the company could even split into two. With this in mind and at its current price, he believes the stock is 50% under intrinsic value.
My many metrics, Hess does appear cheap. On an EV/EBITDA basis, the company trades at just a 4.1 ratio. The two-year forward P/E is under 12, and the company trades at just over book value.
BP, for example, trades cheaper on a P/E basis, but more expensive on an EBITDA basis at 5.42.
Investors should look at www.ReassessHess.com for further information regarding Elliot Management's analysis and demands of the company. If things go the way many expect on Thursday, Hess may be a great medium-long-term investment for investors in the oil and gas space.


Before you consider Hess Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Hess Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


It's still a bitterly fought proxy battle, but might Hess (NYSE:HES) and activist shareholder Elliott Management be moving toward conciliation?
The two sides have been trading sharp barbs for a year now, and yesterday the oil company lambasted the hedge fund operator's board nominees for having "compromised their independence and judgment" for agreeing to receive payment from Elliott. It's offered the shareholder two seats on the board, but Elliott has characterized the move as a "P.R. stunt."
Today, however, the hedge fund has offered up a counter-proposal suggesting it get five board members seated alongside Hess' five board members in a reconstituted board. Perhaps there's a thaw in the air.
Last week Hess said it would agree to split the role of chairman and CEO, one of the demands Elliott has made, though the hedge fund said it was only done after realizing the tide was turning against the oil company. Similar sniping has marked the proxy battle since the beginning.
With the shareholder meeting just days away on May 16 and the rhetoric hot on both sides, perhaps there's a cooling-down period coming that will be reflected in an agreement before investors have to weigh in.
The investment firm said of its latest proposal to reconstitute the board: "Shareholders want real change and a renewed board. Hess has promised such renewal, and this solution will follow through on that promise."
Whether the oil company agrees remains to be seen, as it has not yet responded to the latest offer.



Before you consider Hess Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Hess Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



Several energy companies have come under the heavy scrutiny of activist investors over the past few months for a wide swath of reasons. However, one common trend does exist among their demands: the activist firms want seats on the boards of directors.
The most recent firms to experience this kind of pressure have been Hess (NYSE:HES) and Transocean (NYSE:RIG). Each company has been forced to defend the roles its individual chairmen have played in the firms' current progress, or lack thereof in this case.
What's the latest scoop?
In Hess' case, it involves the son of the company's founder, John Hess. Hess has held the role of chairman for the past 18 years but has decided to step down on his own terms rather than leaving his fate up to a shareholder vote. A similar outcome is transpiring at Transocean after the announcement that chairman Michael Talbert will be removing himself from the post before the end of the year.  
Still work to be done
While both of these issues appear to have worked themselves out, questions still remain that shareholders want to pay very close attention to. Elliott Management has reportedly tied outperformance-related bonuses to its board member nominee deals, which appears a bit shortsighted.
As for Transocean investors, Carl Icahn is not yet finished, seeing as how he is seeking a $4 per year dividend versus the company's proposed $2.24. Management believes $4 per share would remove room for dividend growth and severely undercut the company's financial flexibility.


Before you consider Transocean Ltd., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Transocean Ltd. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


