Based on the aggregated intelligence of 180,000-plus investors participating in Motley Fool CAPS, the Fool's free investing community, integrated energy company Hess (NYSE:HES) has earned a respected four-star ranking.
With that in mind, let's take a closer look at Hess and see what CAPS investors are saying about the stock right now.
Hess facts
Headquarters (founded)
New York (1920)
Market Cap
$25.6 billion
Industry
Integrated oil and gas
Trailing-12-Month Revenue
$39.6 billion
Management
Chairman/CEO John Hess
CFO John Rielly
Return on Equity (average, past 3 years)
13.2%
Cash/Debt
$725 million / $5.8 billion
Dividend Yield
0.5%
Competitors
BP
ConocoPhillips
ExxonMobil
SOURCES: S&P CAPITAL IQ AND MOTLEY FOOL CAPS.
On CAPS, 96% of the 976 members who have rated Hess believe the stock will outperform the S&P 500 going forward.   
Just last week, one of those Fools, All-Star seekinggotham, followed the lead of several value gurus and jumped into the opportunity:
The mother of all piggybacking situations; Elliott Management, Greenlight Capital, Michael Price, etc. Elliott is spearheading and using the basic playbook of poorly managed, overly diversified company needing to shed non-core operations; increase profitability, return cash to investors, etc. [Michael Price] has talked on HES a fair amount and thinks it is worth considerably north of $100 per share.  
If you want market-thumping returns, you need to put together the best portfolio you can. Of course, despite a strong four-star rating, Hess may not be your top choice.



Before you consider Hess Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Hess Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


