We'd all like to invest like the legendary Warren Buffett, turning thousands into millions or more. Buffett analyzes companies by calculating return on invested capital (ROIC) to help determine whether a company has an economic moat -- the ability to earn returns on its money above that money's cost.  
ROIC is perhaps the most important metric in value investing. By determining a company's ROIC, you can see how well it's using the cash you entrust to it and whether it's actually creating value for you. Simply, ROIC divides a company's operating profit by how much investment it took to get that profit. The formula:
ROIC = Net operating profit after taxes / Invested capital
(We have more details on this formula, if you're curious.)
This one-size-fits-all calculation cuts out many of the legal accounting tricks, such as excessive debt, that managers use to boost earnings numbers, and it provides you with an apples-to-apples way to evaluate businesses, even across industries. The higher the ROIC, the more efficiently the company uses capital.
Ultimately, we're looking for companies that can invest their money at rates that are higher than the cost of capital, which for most businesses is between 8% and 12%. We prefer to see ROIC above 12% at a minimum, along with a history of increasing returns, or at least steady returns, which indicate some durability to the company's economic moat.
Let's look at Hess (NYSE: HES) and three of its industry peers, to see how efficiently they use cash. Here are the ROIC figures for each company over a few periods.
Company
TTM
1 Year Ago
3 Years Ago
5 Years Ago
Source: Capital IQ, a division of Standard & Poor's.
*Because BP did not report an effective tax rate at TTM, we used its 33% effective tax rate from last year.
Hess' returns on invested capital have decreased slightly from five years ago, suggesting that its competitive position has weakened. The rest of the listed companies, however, have seen more dramatic declines in their returns over the same time period, suggesting an industrywide issue rather than a company-specific problem.  Of course, BP's negative ROIC during the past four quarters is due more to a one-time event than ongoing issues.
Businesses with consistently high ROIC show that they're efficiently using capital. They also have the ability to treat shareholders well, because they can then use their extra cash to pay out dividends to us, buy back shares, or further invest in their franchise. And healthy and growing dividends are something that Warren Buffett has long loved.
So for more successful investments, dig a little deeper than the earnings headlines to find the company's ROIC. If you'd like, you can add these companies to your Watchlist.



Before you consider BP p.l.c., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and BP p.l.c. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



