Already owning a large position in energy giant ConocoPhillips(NYSE:COP), Warren Buffett recently added to his position in oil refiner Phillips 66 and opened up a new position in oilfield equipment maker National Oilwell Varco(NYSE:NOV). There¡¯s no doubt that Buffett is finding opportunities in energy right now, and that usually means other investors can as well.
In today's video, Matt and Paul talk Buffett's latest moves, as well as a few other energy names investors may want to put on their radar.
If you're on the lookout for some currently intriguing energy plays, check out The Motley Fool's "3 Stocks for $100 Oil." You can get free access to this special report by clicking here.



Before you consider Hess Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Hess Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



Heckmann's acquisition of Power Fuels will increase the company's debt profile, but the short-term funding gap pales in comparison with the upside potential this latest purchase provides. Heckmann lost more than 20% of its value after not releasing guidance during its second-quarter earnings call, but the $155 million in EBITDA that Power Fuels generated last year, plus operations in the oil-rich Bakken shale, will give the new company a viable future, with a huge leg up in a number of the fastest-growing oil plays in the United States. See more in the following video.
The revamped Heckmann is one way to play the emerging shale plays, but there are others. In particular, our analysts have uncovered an under-the-radar company that's dominating this industry. This company is a leading provider of equipment and components used in drilling and production operations, and it's poised to profit in a big way from it. To get the name and detailed analysis of this company that will prosper for years to come, check out our special free report "The Only Energy Stock You'll Ever Need." Don't miss out on this limited-time offer and your opportunity to discover this company before the market does. Click here to access your report -- it's totally free.



Before you consider Nuverra Environmental Solutions, Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Nuverra Environmental Solutions, Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



