The S&P 500 Index (SNPINDEX:^GSPC) ended the day and the week on a higher note, logging its third straight week of gains, as the bull market in equities continues. The index added seven points, or 0.4%, to end at 1,633. Still, a few S&P companies managed to disappoint the market, and their shortcomings were reflected in their outsized losses today. 
Just a few days after Cognizant Technology Solutions (NASDAQ:CTSH) reported earnings that sent shares in the IT and consulting company up 5%, the stock slipped 5%. To be fair to Cognizant, the stumble may be more due to political happenings than anything it's done wrong. An immigration reform bill in the Senate, considered a potential boon to the technology sector, is very unlikely to make it through the House of Representatives. As Cognizant President Gordon Coburn remarked in the earnings call, this is according to the very Senator who authored the bill.
Oil refiner Tesoro (NYSE:ANDV) lost 2.9% today, on a day when the oil and gas sector, as a whole, was the worst performing of the 10 major sectors. Tesoro is reeling from a recent shutdown in a Washington state refinery earlier this week after a leak was discovered. Thankfully, the issue has been resolved, but the 125,000-barrel-per-day refinery lost some meaningful business in the process.
Lastly, and quite fittingly considering the weak showing in energy today, another oil refiner rounds out our list of underperformers. Hess (NYSE:HES) shares slipped 2.3% after the company bowed to Elliott Management, a hedge fund that had demanded change at the upper levels of the company. Hess will split the roles of CEO and chairman -- positions that are currently occupied by one man, John Hess -- after the annual meeting next week.




Before you consider the S&P 500 Index - Price Return (USD), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the S&P 500 Index - Price Return (USD) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021


