Investing isn't easy. Even Warren Buffett counsels that most investors should invest in a low-cost index like the S&P 500. That way, "you'll be buying into a wonderful industry, which in effect is all of American industry," he says.
But there are, of course, companies whose long-term fortunes differ substantially from the index. In this series, we look at how individual stocks have performed against the broad S&P 500. 
Step on up, Hess (NYSE: HES).                                                              
Hess shares have underperformed the S&P 500 over the past quarter-century, and with more volatility:  
Source: S&P Capital IQ.
Since 1987, shares have returned an average of 8.3% a year, compared with 9.7% a year for the S&P (both include dividends). That difference adds up fast. One thousand dollars invested in the S&P in 1987 would be worth $19,200 today. In Hess, it'd be worth just $12,800.
Dividends accounted for a lot of those gains. Compounded since 1987, dividends have made up about two-thirds of Hess's total returns. For the S&P, dividends account for 39% of total returns.
Now have a look at how Hess earnings compare with S&P 500 earnings:
Source: S&P Capital IQ.
Some outperformance here, although again with more volatility. Since 1995, Hess earnings per share have increased by an average of 10% a year, compared with 6% a year for the broader index. 
What's that meant for valuations? Hess has traded for an average of 32 times earnings since 1987 -- above the 24 times earnings of the broader S&P 500. It's far different today, however. Hess currently trades for about 8 times next year's expected earnings.
Through it all, shares have been slight disappointments over the past quarter-century.  
Of course, the important question is whether that will continue. That's where you come in. Our CAPS community currently ranks Hess with a five-star rating (out of five). Care to disagree? Leave your thoughts in the comment section below, or add Hess to My Watchlist.



Before you consider Hess Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Hess Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of May 11, 2021



