In 2012 ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP) made a huge change, spinning off its non-drilling operations to become a pure play upstream oil company. ConocoPhilips now presents quite the contrast to global energy giant ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), and the divide between these two companies is huge when it comes to dividend investing as well. Here's why Exxon is the better dividend stock.
On May 1, 2012, ConocoPhillips completed the spin-off of its midstream and downstream operations into a company called Phillips 66. ConocoPhillips basically went all in on oil and natural gas drilling. At the time oil was trading at historically high prices, and the decision seemed to make a lot of sense, assuming oil prices remained high. They didn't, falling dramatically in mid-2014. That's par for the course in the highly volatile oil and natural gas space -- but without its pipeline and refining operations to soften the hit, ConocoPhillips and its shareholders were fully exposed to the pain of falling oil prices.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
Exxon, on the other hand, is a diversified energy giant. Not only does it have broad exposure to drilling, but it also owns massive midstream and downstream businesses. Downstream operations often benefit from low energy prices because oil and natural gas are key inputs in these businesses. The benefit is not enough to fully offset the hit from a steep oil price decline, but it evens out the ups and downs. This isn't rocket science, just the inherent benefits of diversification. 
If you are looking to bet on the direction of oil prices, ConocoPhillips is a great choice. If you are looking for a buy-and-hold energy stock that will let you sleep well at night, Exxon is a better option. 
The oil price decline that started in mid-2014 was huge, with oil falling from over $100 per barrel down to around the $30 level. It should come as no surprise that ConocoPhillips and Exxon didn't do so well. Exxon's earnings dropped from $7.60 per share in 2014 to a low of $1.88 per share in 2016 before rebounding. ConocoPhillips' earnings plummeted from $5.51 per share in 2014 to a loss of $3.58 per share in 2015 before starting to turn around. However, the red ink continued for two more years, with losses of $2.91 per share in 2016 and $0.70 per share in 2017. It wasn't until 2018 that the company's bottom line was back in the black.
To be fair, there are one-time items in those figures. So ConocoPhillips' actual operating performance wasn't as bad as the red ink would have you believe. But there is one number that sticks out, and it was every bit as bad as it looked -- in 2016 ConocoPhillips cut its dividend by 66%. With earnings tied entirely to the price of oil, it pretty much had no choice in the matter during such a deep oil downturn. Exxon, by comparison, continued to increase its dividend using the strength of its more conservative, diversified business model to keep rewarding investors even during the downturn. Its streak of annual increases is now up to 37 years.
If you are an income investor looking to live off the dividends your portfolio generates, there's really no comparison between these two companies. Diversification and consistency win.
Sticking with slow and boring, however, can be hard when times are good. For example, ConocoPhillips started increasing its dividend again in 2017, with 2019 the third consecutive year with an increase. After resetting, ConocoPhillips could finally be on stronger ground. The stock price, meanwhile, is up around 50% since oil prices bottomed out in early 2016. Exxon's stock is down around 6% over the same span.

COP DATA BY YCHARTS
Even looking over the entire span since the spin-off, ConocoPhillips comes out on top. Its shares are up 6% since the 2012 break up, while Exxon's are down 16%. Brent crude, an oil industry benchmark, is off by around 42%. When you add in dividends, looking at total return instead of just stock prices, ConocoPhillips still leads with a gain of 35%. Exxon, however, shifts from a loss to a gain of 8% -- not exactly impressive, but it shows the power of dividends. On top of these stats, since ConocoPhillips started raising its disbursement again, the dividend has grown more than Exxon's.
Before getting too lost in the good numbers, however, take a look at a bad one: Between June 2014 and mid-January 2016 (about when oil prices started to recover), Exxon's stock declined by around 25%, while ConocoPhillips' stock dropped 50% (and the oil-focused company ended up cutting its dividend). Exaggerated price movements are really the norm for ConocoPhillips, since it is tied directly to often-volatile oil prices. Exxon tends to muddle along, spitting out a slowly rising quarterly dividend.
ConocoPhillips stock has been more rewarding overall, but that could change as quickly as oil prices. And don't forget the very real risk of a dividend cut in the event of a notable oil price decline. Slow and steady Exxon isn't exciting, but history shows that your quarterly dividend check is safer.
ConocoPhillips is actually a pretty well-run oil company, and definitely worth a close look if that's what you want to own. However, Exxon is a better dividend stock if you are looking to live off of the income your portfolio generates. Simply put, diversification and consistency make a huge difference when it comes to dividend stocks. 
And with all of that out of the way, it's time to note that Exxon's 4.7% dividend yield is more than twice as high as the 2% you'll get from ConocoPhillips. Some dividend investors would have probably started with the yield, but in this case it isn't the most important piece of the puzzle. In fact, before ConocoPhillips cut its dividend in 2016 the yield was around 9%. Exxon yielded less than half that amount. The problem, of course, is that ConocoPhillips' fat yield proved short-lived because of the very different business approach it takes.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


On Sunday, Sept. 15, coordinated strikes on Saudi Arabian oil facilities stripped the country of more than 5 million barrels per day of production capability, representing a 50% decrease in the amount of daily Saudi Arabian oil capacity. The following Monday was one of the craziest trading days year to date. Oil ended the day up 12.9%, and all three major stock indexes were negative due to concerns that higher oil prices could encourage a global recession. Oil proceeded to shed about half its gains the following day when Prince Abdulaziz bin Salman, the energy minister of Saudi Arabia, estimated that oil production would be restored to normal levels by the end of September.
Although investors shouldn't make investment decisions based on weekly price action, taking note of the way different companies reacted to such volatile swings in oil prices allows investors to reevaluate existing and potential holdings in line with their risk tolerance. Risk-averse investors may find themselves shocked at this weeks volatility and may want to reconsider some of their holdings, whereas investors with larger risk appetite and long-term time horizon may find many of these investments attractive and worth considering.  
Drillers were the biggest winners. Patterson-UTI, Nabors Industries, and Helmerich & Payne were up 20.97%, 18.26%, and 14.33% respectively.
Upstream exploration and production companies were next. Devon Energy, Marathon Oil Corporation, ConocoPhillips, and Occidental Petroleum, were up 12.17%, 11.57%, 9.05%, and 6.01%, respectively.
Next were the oil-field services companies. Halliburton, Schlumberger, and National Oilwell Varco all rose 10.95%, 5.3%, and 2.54%, respectively.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The supermajors posted modest gains. BP was the biggest winner with a 3.99% gain. Chevron, Royal Dutch Shell, and ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) gained 2.16%, 1.97%, and 1.50%, respectively. Due to Exxon's size and global reach, some investors would think that Exxon would be a big winner after Monday's news. But Exxon has the largest refinery portfolio of any supermajor and the third-largest barrels per day of refinery output of all U.S. oil and gas companies, behind only Marathon Petroleum Corporation (NYSE:MPC) and Valero (NYSE:VLO). 
On the losing side were refiners Valero and Marathon Petroleum Corporation, which fell 3.67% and 1.65%, respectively. Refiners tend to go down when crude oil goes up because their margins contract. On the flip side, in times of falling oil prices or extended periods of mediocre oil prices, refining stocks undergo expanding margins. Margin expansion won't occur instantly. In fact, refiners can have high margins in high crude oil prices as well as long as refined product prices keep pace. Eventually, refineries will adjust to crude prices. Refiners offer attractive shareholder value due to steady cash flows and typically high dividends.
Sept. 16 and 17 reminded investors that even significant events can have only a short-lived effect. Oil swung as high as 15% simply on the prospect of a crippled Saudi Arabia, but retracted to only a 7% gain on even the slightest possibility that Saudi Arabia could regain production sooner than expected. Commodity traders, who depend on headlines such as these, can trade as they wish, but long-term investors should stay focused on the companies themselves.
That said, even long-term investors can't ignore the influence that oil has on oil and gas stocks, and the way that influence varies by company. Risk tolerance and years-to-retirement play a big role in investor confidence. Owning a supermajor like BP, Shell, Chevron, or ExxonMobil may not move much at all on a surge in oil prices, certainly not as much as a drilling, E&P, or oilfield services company. Refiners may even go down on a big spike in oil as we saw with Valero and Marathon Petroleum on Monday. 
The news on Monday was the largest oil disruption since the Iranian revolution. Yet just one week later, we find out that the impact will be largely contained. Short-term swings can present an opportunity to add or trim a small position, but the long-term forecast of oil prices sketch the trajectory these stocks are likely to follow.
If you are looking for something other than sensational news headlines to understand trends in the energy market, the U.S. Energy Information Administration's Short-Term Energy Outlook is a good place to start. Released monthly for free, it reflects on global consumption, production, demand, and prices of oil and natural gas from the previous month, and estimates where these metrics are headed for the rest of the year.
A broader, more in-depth report worth paying attention to is the EIA's Annual Energy Outlook. Released in January and also free, the nearly 100-page Annual Energy Outlook is chock-full of rich and helpful content. There are some interesting nuggets, and historical data can be useful, but forecasts can be painfully inaccurate. The outlook should be taken with a grain of salt compared to making sure that companies can adapt, plan for the worse, and are good stewards of shareholder capital.
In sum, the news headlines will cause short-term commodity price volatility and move stocks, some more than others, but their effects are unlikely to last. A better recipe for long-term success is the following:
Nothing can take away from the drama and historical significance of Sept. 16 where oil had the biggest one-day gain in over a decade. But separating the historical significance and what it means for the stocks themselves empowers investors to use headlines to their advantage and not allow their portfolios to simply be a product of short-term volatility. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


You'd think it'd be obvious that one of the key tasks of an oil company is drilling for oil. However, oil major ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) hasn't exactly been doing a good job of that recently, with production steadily declining over the past five years. The company's share price has also been trending downward during that time. 
But there may be a glimmer of hope for shareholders, and it's coming from an unlikely place: Guyana. The small South American country is only a little bit bigger than the state of Idaho, with fewer people living there than in Delaware. Here's why this tropical oasis might be the key to returning ExxonMobil to outperformance.
EXXONMOBIL OPERATES A TOP OFFSHORE BLOCK IN GUYANA, WHICH IT HOPES WILL LEAD TO OUTPERFORMANCE. IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
ExxonMobil's annual production declines have been small, but they've been accelerating, which should concern investors. In 2016, the company produced 1% less oil and gas than it had in 2015. Then, in 2017, production fell by 1.7%. In 2018, production tumbled 3.8%, to 3.8 million barrels of oil equivalents per day (BOE/d).
This actually makes sense: Existing wells will usually produce less and less petroleum each year. Unless a company drills enough new wells -- or purchases enough existing wells from a competitor -- its overall production will decline. And during the oil price downturn of 2014-2017, Exxon severely cut back on new exploration wells. Fewer exploration wells meant fewer opportunities to start new production wells, and in the meantime, existing wells produced less. 
Luckily for the company, it began devoting more resources to exploration in 2017, and in 2018, it drilled more exploratory wells than it had the prior year. In 2020, management expects to drill more exploration wells than it did in 2012 for the first time since then. 
Because of this push, Exxon expects production to actually grow in 2020, by about 5%, and continue to increase every year thereafter. And thanks to a renewed focus on deepwater drilling, Guyana is a huge part of this plan. 
Stabroek was the original Dutch name for Guyana's capital of Georgetown. Today, "Stabroek" is a name for places throughout the country, including a famous historical market, a major newspaper, and a 6.6-million-acre offshore exploration block (about 10,300 square miles). A subsidiary of Exxon holds a 45% interest in the block, while a Hess (NYSE:HES) subsidiary has a 30% interest and a subsidiary of Chinese oil company CNOOC (NYSE:CEO) holds 25%. ExxonMobil, though, is in charge of the drilling operations.
Currently, Guyana has no oil and gas production to speak of, so Exxon's announcement in 2015 of a major oil find in the Stabroek Block got serious attention. Since that first discovery at the Liza-1 well, Exxon has made 13 additional discoveries, making Stabroek one the company's most promising fields. 
The most recent discovery, at the Tripletail-1 well, consisted of 108 feet of high-quality oil-bearing sandstone. While the company didn't release an estimate of how much petroleum it might expect to produce specifically from Tripletail, its Stabroek discoveries to date have exceeded an estimated 6 billion BOE. 
Because Tripletail is so far down the list of Exxon's Stabroek discoveries, it's going to be a while before any oil or gas is produced there. There's a lot that has to happen between successful identification of petroleum at a well site and production commencing. Liza Phase 1 -- the first petroleum discovery at Stabroek in 2015 -- just had its floating production storage and offloading ship arrive on Aug. 29, and production won't begin until next year at the earliest. Once it gets going, however, the site will produce 120,000 BOE/d. 
Similarly, the Liza Phase 2 development won't begin production until 2022, and the Payara site -- Exxon's third Stabroek discovery in 2017 -- "could be as early as 2023," according to a company presentation, with each of those two sites producing an estimated 220,000 BOE/d.
Given those dates, it looks like it's about a five- to six-year delay between a discovery and production, which means Tripletail isn't likely to start producing before 2024 at the earliest. And with another 10 discoveries already in the queue, it's possible Tripletail won't see production until close to 2030, if then. 
But ExxonMobil isn't letting up on its Stabroek exploration. It's announced plans to add a fourth drillship to the block in October. Of the three drillships already there, two are drilling new exploratory wells. Investors can expect the list of discoveries at Stabroek to continue growing this year and next.
Exxon's production problems already seem to be clearing up, thanks in part to its leading position in the Permian Basin. However, as its existing wells age, it will need to bring major assets online to make up the difference. The Stabroek Block appears to be exactly the treasure trove the company needed to power its production and ensure it doesn't fall behind in the coming decade. 
For investors, this is a very good thing. Oil exploration is fraught with risks, and many companies have had to write down the costs of unsuccessful explorations in the past. The company's success in Stabroek should reassure investors -- and investors in Hess and CNOOC -- of robust future production growth.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


