Dividends are a cash return on your investment in a stock -- effectively, companies are paying you to own their shares. Since you own part of the companies in which you are investing, and thus have a right to a portion of the earnings, it only makes sense that you should expect a piece of the action via a dividend payment. Here are three companies that take returning cash to shareholders very seriously, and that also have sizable yields: ExxonMobil Corporation (NYSE:XOM), Duke Energy Corporation (NYSE:DUK), and W.P. Carey Inc. (NYSE:WPC).
ExxonMobil has a yield of 4.2%. It has increased its dividend every year for 36 consecutive years, an impressive feat given that the company operates in the highly cyclical energy industry. Over the trailing 10 years, the average annual dividend increase was 8%. The most recent hike, which was announced in April, was roughly 6.5%. Although lower than the 10-year average, that's still roughly double the 3% historical rate of inflation.    
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Exxon's yield today is toward the high end of its historical range, a function of the mid-2014 energy downturn and concerns that the diversified oil and natural gas giant has fallen behind peers now that oil prices are picking up again. There's some truth to those fears, given that Exxon's production has fallen for a couple of years and its return on capital employed rate has gone from leading the pack to simply middle of the pack.
However, Exxon has plans in the works that should help reverse these trends. For example, it is ramping up production in the onshore U.S. market, drilling offshore in Guyana and Brazil, and investing in natural gas production in Mozambique. To improve returns, meanwhile, Exxon is planning to take control of more of its investments so it can benefit from its expertise in running large projects. This oil major is a giant ship, however, so it will take time to turn things around. While other investors are being impatient, you can get paid to wait for Exxon to get things moving in the right direction again.   
Duke Energy is one of the largest electric and natural gas utilities in the United States. It yields around 4.5% and has increased its dividend every year for 13 consecutive years. The average dividend increase over the trailing 10 years was roughly 3%, right in line with inflation. However, after something of a corporate makeover that jettisoned non-regulated assets and added natural gas to the picture, Duke is targeting 4% to 6% dividend growth through 2022.   
With a largely regulated business, Duke has to get the rates it charges customers approved by the government. It does this by spending money to upgrade and expand its business. The current plan calls for $37 billion worth of spending across its business (roughly 90% going toward its regulated electric assets, 8% into its natural gas businesses, and the rest to renewable power) between 2017 and 2021. That should provide ample support for the utility's growth targets.   

DUK BETA (3Y) DATA BY YCHARTS.
One of the biggest allures of Duke Energy's stock, however, is its incredibly low beta of 0.1, a measure of relative volatility. This suggests that Duke's stock is around 90% less volatile than the broader market. This power company won't excite you, but it can provide a solid high-yielding cornerstone to a broader dividend portfolio.
W.P. Carey is a net lease real estate investment trust (REIT). This means that it owns property that it rents out to others, but the lessees pay for most of the operating costs of the assets, including things like taxes and property maintenance. Carey's yield is 6.6% and its dividend has been increased every year for 21 consecutive years. The average annual increase over the past decade was around 8%. Carey has a long history of increasing the dividend every quarter, with the first-quarter dividend up around 2% over the same quarter last year. That's a modest hike, but there's a catalyst to watch.   
Carey, a publicly traded REIT, manages non-traded REITs, one of which is nearing the end of its life. It's highly likely that Carey will try to buy that non-traded REIT (CPA-17), which will increase the size of its portfolio and should lead to a more sizable dividend increase. (At least that's what happened when Carey bought CPA-16.) In other words, there's a very real catalyst for higher dividends.   
CAREY'S FOREIGN DIVERSIFICATION IS UNUSUAL IN THE REIT SPACE. IMAGE SOURCE: W.P. CAREY INC.  
One thing to like about Carey is its diversification. Many net lease REITs are focused on retail properties, but Carey's portfolio breakdown is industrial (29% of adjusted base rents), office (25%), retail (17%), warehouse (15%), self storage (5%), and other (the remainder). And roughly one-third of its rents come from outside the United States, largely from Europe. With a high current yield, a potential dividend catalyst, and a broadly diversified property portfolio, income investors should like what they see at this longtime dividend payer.   
ExxonMobil, Duke Energy, and W.P. Carey come from very different industries and have very different backstories, but all offer notable yields backed by long histories of annual dividend increases. Simply put, they pay shareholders well to own them. If you take some time to dig into each of these stocks, I'm confident that you'll like what you find -- and that one or more may wind up in your dividend portfolio.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


You like cheap? We all like cheap! But we also like quality, whether we're talking about used cars or dividend stocks.
And despite the stock market's long bull run, there are still some dividend stocks out there that are both cheap and high-quality. So let's go bargain shopping and see if we can find some! Three in the bargain bin that look promising are Kinder Morgan (NYSE:KMI), ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), and Apache Corporation (NASDAQ:APA). Here's why they might be right for your portfolio.
BARGAIN HUNTERS WILL LOVE THESE THREE CHEAP OIL AND GAS INDUSTRY STOCKS. IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
You'd think the stock market would reward the world's largest oil and gas pipeline owner, Kinder Morgan, especially after the company announced a stellar Q1 2018 and boosted its dividend by an impressive 60% -- no, that's not a typo: sixty percent! 
But after a small bump the day the earnings were announced, Kinder Morgan's shares have been trending lower...again. Wall Street has been bearish on the company since management announced a -- probably necessary -- quarterly dividend cut from $0.51/share to $0.125/share in 2015. The price is still languishing at near-historic lows, recently hitting its lowest per-share price in more than two years. 
And yet, during that time, Kinder Morgan has been executing well. In 2017, it delivered on its strategic plans. In the first quarter of 2018, it brought in more than $1.2 billion in cash flow thanks to natural gas transportation volumes that were up 10% year over year and natural gas pipeline earnings that rose by 6% year over year. That cash was $804 million more than management needed to pay out its newly increased dividend. So it funded some expansion projects and bought back $250 million in stock with the leftovers. 
That's not to say that Kinder Morgan is without risks. The company has a high debt ratio of 6.2 times EBITDA, which is well within its historical range but higher than the generally accepted upper limit of 5 times EBITDA. While Kinder Morgan has made some progress in debt repayment, it's surprising that a company so flush with cash hasn't devoted more energy to paying down some of that debt.
Still, Kinder Morgan is trading at a discount to its peers on an enterprise value to EBITDA basis, which makes it both embarrasingly cheap and a top prospect for investors who want to cash in on the North American gas production boom. 
Kinder Morgan may be the world's largest oil and gas pipeline owner, but its size pales in comparison to the world's largest oil company by market cap: ExxonMobil. As an integrated oil major, ExxonMobil not only produces oil and gas, but also refines and markets it. However, there's one big way ExxonMobil currently differs from its oil major peers: its shares are undeniably cheap by comparison.
While most oil major stocks' prices have risen over the past year -- and some, like Royal Dutch Shell's, have risen a lot -- ExxonMobil's has fallen. That's pushed its valuation way down compared to the other oil majors. ExxonMobil's P/E ratio is currently 16.6, lower than Shell's 19.1 and less than half of BP's 34.3. Its price to tangible book value is the lowest it's been since 2015, while its current dividend yield of 4% is the highest it's been in more than a decade.
Of course, that doesn't necessarily mean that ExxonMobil is undervalued: it's possible that it's simply not as valuable a company as it was five or ten years ago. It's true that production has been declining for Exxon lately, and that some of its oil major peers have caught up to its historically superior returns.
But ExxonMobil isn't going anywhere -- and its dividend certainly isn't either. The company has outlined plans to boost its returns, and is investing heavily in promising new offshore oilfields in Guyana and natural gas resources in Papua New Guinea. It will probably take time for these investments to pay off for Exxon, but in the meantime, you can enjoy the healthy dividend at a bargain price. 
The benchmark prices for both domestic and international crude oil closed above $70/barrel for the first time since 2014 this month. That was good for oil majors like ExxonMobil, but it's been even better for independent oil drillers, which are having a very, very good 2018. Shares of many independent oil and gas exploration and production companies have risen 20% or more since the start of the year. That's good for existing energy investors, but for would-be investors, it's made value tough to find in the oil patch.
The market's been giving one driller the cold shoulder, though. Apache Corporation, which despite the improving oil price climate and a huge new Permian Basin play, has actually seen its shares decline by 1.8% so far this year. That looks like a great opportunity to snap up some shares at a bargain price, and nab Apache's best-in-class 2.4% dividend yield into the bargain. That is, if there isn't some other reason the market is sour on the stock.
It's true that Apache has missed some of the production targets it set for itself in 2017. This was partly due to Hurricane Harvey -- which caused several problems for Houston-based Apache -- and also thanks to the company's sale of its low-margin Canadian holdings. It also reflected delays in bringing Alpine High -- its big Permian Basin find -- online.
Alpine High sits on acreage in West Texas that Apache was able to pick up on the cheap, thanks to misconceptions about the amount of hydrocarbon potential in the region. But that meant Apache needed to build out Alpine High's infrastructure from scratch, and some unforeseen delays have made investors nervous that the company is missing out on today's high oil prices.
Still, Apache's first quarter of 2018 saw more oil and gas finally coming from Alpine High, with Permian Basin production up 19% from the company's Q2 2017 low point. Indeed, Apache raised its 2018 production guidance on the strength of its Permian operations. If Apache can keep up this momentum, the market should start to take notice. In the meantime, Apache investors can content themselves with a decent yield at a bargain price.
Most embarrassingly cheap stocks are cheap for a reason. That reason may be that the company has a high debt load, like Kinder Morgan, or has lost some of its advantages over its peers, like ExxonMobil, or has run into delays executing its plans, like Apache Corporation. And sometimes, there are good reasons for the market to be skeptical of those stocks. 
But no matter what the reason is behind the pricing, Kinder Morgan, ExxonMobil, and Apache are looking seriously undervalued at the moment and should be very attractive as part of a balanced dividend portfolio at these prices.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


