Lots of people were a little shocked when Exxonmobil (NYSE:XOM) CEO Rex Tillerson said at the company's Analyst Day meeting that people should get used to the idea that oil prices could remain low for a while. Normally, someone in Mr. Tillerson's position would almost cringe when saying such a thing; but his presentation of that prognostication seemed almost like he was stating a well-known fact. 
Truth is, the company has been almost unknowingly preparing for this very sort of event since 2013, and investors who have followed its progress during the past few years would know that. Let's take a look at why the company has been prepping itself for a moment just like this years in advance without even realizing it.
We knew it all along
Traveling all the way back to Exxonmobil's Analyst meeting back in 2013, one thing that was brought up was the fact that the company was expecting that total capital expenditures for fiscal year 2013 were going to peak, and spending afterwards was going to diminish all the way to 2017 as several big-ticket projects were going to come online. The big push back then wasn't necessarily a concern of low oil prices, but instead an acknowledgement that it had been a little overzealous on budgeting new projects, and wanted to start putting more of that cash flow back into the hands of shareholders. 
Since that time, we have seen that very scenario play out. In 2013 the company's total capital expenditures were about $41 billion including a $3.1 billion acquisition. Since then, the company's expenditures have been on a slow decline as many of those major capital projects have been brought online.

SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL INVESTOR PRESENTATION.
With close to 1.3 million barrels per day of new production sources coming online between 2013 and 2017, the company estimates that it will net in an overall production increase of 300,000 barrels per day -- got to account for that natural well decline -- to 4.3 million bpd. 
Getting scared and spending less?
The immediate conclusion that some will make when seeing the future budget for Exxonmobil is that it's taking Mr. Tillerson's message to heart, and spending less in the next couple of years by bringing growth plans to a grinding halt. That isn't necessarily the truth. According to what Mr. Tillerson said at the recent Analyst Day conference, the major reductions could come more from putting pressure on its suppliers and contractors to reduce costs.
I do want to emphasize that this does not reflect a change to our long-term investment approach. We're capturing cost savings and we expect further bottom-of-cycle efficiencies, particularly in rig rates. We expect lower prices for commodities like steel and other raw materials, and we expect reduced contractor fees. Our lower CapEx outlook also includes an appropriate reexamination of our opportunity set and tactically resequencing some of our FID choices consistent with efforts to improve the specific terms and conditions as well as optimize the development plans in this environment.
In short by selectively investing through the cycle, we continue to be positioned to capture market savings and consistently deliver better financial returns. We'll keep a close eye on our cash and prudently utilize our balance sheet to fund attractive investments.
Exxonmobil isn't the only oil and gas producer to have this idea in mind. In fact, some independent oil and gas producers here in the U.S. have even said they will not spend another dime on new development until contractor costs come down, as well. 
Exxonmobil was already looking hard at the options within its portfolio that make sense at $40-$60 per-barrel today. If the company were to see significant cost reductions on materials and services, it should be able to make a few more projects economical within that price range. Even though the company expects to spend less money during the next few years, it doesn't expect to see a major decline in production growth, or a severe reduction in reserves.
What a Fool believes
Before anyone overreacts to the statements that Rex Tillerson said at this recent analyst meeting, just know that Exxonmobil -- and many other members of the Big Oil community -- has been anticipating a decline in capital spending for the past several years, and it's not a knee-jerk reaction to the recent decline in oil prices. Exxonmobil has a reputation of spending on development through the good times and the lean times, and the possibility that oil prices could remain low for a couple of years isn't going to change that.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


This article was written by Oilprice.com, the leading provider of energy news in the world. Check out these other articles.
New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie's administration's assertion that it worked "aggressively" to ensure that ExxonMobil Corp. (NYSE:XOM) reimbursed the state for environmental contamination isn't changing any minds among the critics of the deal.
For more than a decade the state has been fighting for a court order that would have required Exxon to pay $8.9 billion for environmental repair and other damages related to the company's oil refining and other activities in northern New Jersey. Instead, the Christie administration has agreed to settle on $225 million to resolve the state's lawsuit.
Word of the settlement emerged on Feb. 27 as a New Jersey judge apparently was considering how much Exxon should have to pay. The deal generated a chorus of criticism and vows by state legislators to block the deal.
On March 5, the state's acting attorney general, John Hoffman, and its environmental commissioner, Bob Martin, issued a statement saying their two offices had worked hard together to reach a settlement with Exxon, which they called "the single largest environmental settlement with a corporate defendant in New Jersey history."
"[T]his administration aggressively pushed the case to trial [and] is the result of long-fought settlement negotiations that predated and postdated the trial," the statement by Hoffman and Martin said.
Exxon said it would have no comment on the matter.
Despite the explanation from the state's Republican administration, two prominent Democrats in the state legislature, Senate President Steve Sweeney and Sen. Raymond Lesniak, are preparing to file a motion in the Exxon suit to block the settlement. Lesniak has also filed a formal request with the court for all documents related to the settlement.
"We have to and we will get to the bottom of this case to determine how $8.9 billion shrunk down to $250 million," Lesniak said in a statement. "We are going to dig deep and then we will dig deeper to find the truth."
Sweeney and Lesniak are among Christie's critics who say he the governor acted quickly to take advantage of a budget law allowing the governor to divert revenue from environmental settlements that exceed $50 million away from intended clean-ups to the state's general fund.
The law expires June 30, and the critics say it forced Christie to act quickly by reducing the fines to the satisfaction of Exxon and use the proceeds to fill gaps in the state's budget or even to finance subsidies meant to attract businesses to the state.
"Christie was trying to get this settlement in before [June 30] because [the state Legislature] won't repeat it in the new budget," Lesniak said.
Christie is chairman of the Republican Governors Association, which has been the beneficiary of more than $1.9 billion in donations from Exxon since Christie first ran for governor in 2009. Asked if the generous settlement amounts to a gift from Christie to Exxon, Lesniak told the International Business Times, "One can certainly see it that way."
The state's suit says Exxon damaged more than 1,500 acres of meadows, wetlands and marshes in the northern New Jersey communities of Bayonne and Linden, where Exxon operated multiple oil refineries for decades. Just two of these facilities, the Bayway and Bayonne sites, would cost $8.9 billion to restore, according to an expert hired by the state Department of Environmental Protection.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


