ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) is experiencing a few significant changes in the next few months. In this clip from Industry Focus: Energy, Motley Fool energy analysts Sean O'Reilly and Taylor Muckerman talk about how bullish they are about the company and why.
A full transcript follows the video.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021



This podcast was recorded on Dec. 15, 2016.
Sean O'Reilly: Bringing it back around to our Exxon-themed episode, talk to me about the new CEO.
Taylor Muckerman: Yeah, Darren Woods. He's been company president for a few months now. He was the natural successor, he's been groomed for this role. He has 14 years before he'll be forced to retire.
O'Reilly: I wasn't going to ask, but I was thinking it.
Muckerman: Yeah. He's 51, so he has some time there. Interestingly, he's from the downstream chemicals refining side of the business, which --
O'Reilly: Futuristic, high-margin.
Muckerman: Yeah, and it's been buoying the business lately. If high oil prices don't come back to what they were five to 10 years ago, like, if you see $60, $70 as the ceiling, then downstream is going to be very meaningful for this company moving forward.
O'Reilly: Correct me if I'm wrong, but that's what Saudi Arabia, with Saudi Aramco's IPO is looking at. They want to build up that part of Aramco's business.
Muckerman: Yeah, and then reduce their own dependence on oil for energy, and then dump all the oil that they're not using for that into the chemicals and refining business. Basically, everything you touch is impacted by the chemicals and refining business.
O'Reilly: Right, this laptop, this stuff --
Muckerman: Plastics, rubber. Granted, there are some new technologies out there where it's not necessary, but you'd better darn well believe that 80% of what you see in a bedroom or a kitchen or something ...
O'Reilly: It's like in The Graduate, when the dad is like, "Get into plastics!"
Muckerman: Yeah, "Plastics, plastics, plastics. I got one word for you," and he says it three times. It's not dead yet, and it was actually probably pretty prescient back then.
O'Reilly: Is that when he's floating in the pool?
Muckerman: No, that's when he runs outside behind the house during his graduation party, because he doesn't want to talk to anybody. When he's floating in the pool, he's not listening to anybody.
O'Reilly: That's right, and he's like, "You need to get a job, son." So, bringing it back around, I'm sure we have a few, at least, ExxonMobil shareholders listening.
Muckerman: Not least among them, Rex Tillerson, who owns over $200 million in shares.
O'Reilly: Right. We know you're listening, Rex! Are you feeling pretty good? Dividends looking good? Downstream?
Muckerman: Yeah. Dividends are good, downstream is carrying the load along with the chemical side of the business.
O'Reilly: Does this make you more bullish than you would have been a month ago? Do you know what I mean, more optimistic?
Muckerman: Well, yeah, because their former CEO is the potential secretary of state, so if anything gets repealed or eased in Russia sanctions-wise -- significant portion of Exxon's potential future production is based there. So if anything gets freed up, that will be a boon. The new CEO has worked with downstream most of his career, so I think that's positive for this company. And unlike previous CEOs, who pretty much all came from the upstream. So maybe bringing a slightly different viewpoint. But most people think it will be business as usual, at least right away.
O'Reilly: Well, and such a huge company, I mean, running ExxonMobil is like running a small country.
Muckerman: Yeah, he's not going to come in and make dramatic changes right away, and I doubt that he will in general. I wouldn't be surprised, though, to see him make an acquisition, like, his acquisition to get things running --
O'Reilly: Shoot the cannon.
Muckerman: "Here I am, world." That wouldn't surprise me. Probably not right away. But it's not like the market is overpriced right now.
President-elect Donald Trump recently named Rex Tillerson, CEO of ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), to be his nominee for secretary of state.
In this clip from Industry Focus: Energy, Sean O'Reilly and Taylor Muckerman explain why Tillerson was offered the job and why he took it, and why the public shouldn't worry too much about Tillerson's alleged oil-related ties to Russia.
A full transcript follows the video.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021



This podcast was recorded on Dec. 15, 2016.
Sean O'Reilly: Donald Trump made an interesting pick for his administration --
Taylor Muckerman: A couple, but we'll get into the biggest one first.
O'Reilly: Rex Tillerson, the CEO of ExxonMobil, for secretary of state. Like, this is the job that Thomas Jefferson had under George Washington. It's Rex Tillerson.
Muckerman: Well, history.
O'Reilly: I'm sorry, do you not appreciate the historical references?
Muckerman: No, it's great, I was excited. That's why I dropped a bomb. Acknowledgement bomb.
O'Reilly: Oh, OK. But seriously, why is this being done? Were you surprised? Is it humorous?
Muckerman: I think everybody was surprised.
O'Reilly: Why did he take the job? Was he bored?
Muckerman: Well, he's not bored at the moment, but he did announce he was retiring in March of 2017. That has been known. So he's out of a job in a few months; why not become the secretary of state for a few years?
O'Reilly: Why not?
Muckerman: And this was interesting -- I didn't realize this until I started doing some reading on the subject, but you can't be CEO of Exxon beyond the age of 65. It's mandatory retirement.
O'Reilly: That seems a little old-school and draconian. Correct me?
Muckerman: Yeah, no doubt. I haven't ever seen a mandatory retirement age, other than the Supreme Court. [Editor's note: There is no mandatory retirement age for U.S. Supreme Court justices.]
O'Reilly: I mean, Buffett is 84, he was born in '32. [Editor's note: Buffett is actually 86, born in 1930.] 
Muckerman: Yeah, and he's still rocking. So, yeah, he was done in March --
O'Reilly: Can you imagine Berkshire Hathaway today if Buffett was forced to retire --
Muckerman: Well, Buffett wouldn't retire, because he would be forcing himself to retire by installing a mandatory retirement age.
O'Reilly: Listeners, if you're just listening on your phones, with just the audio, I have a look of sincere shock on my face.
Muckerman: I did, too. I read that, and it was like, I've never seen that before. But regardless, he was out of a job. But if you look at what Exxon has done since he was CEO, and even before -- because this is the only company he's ever worked for, he was with Exxon before it merged with Mobil and became what we know it today as. He's a dealmaker around the globe. That's pretty much why I think he was selected. Exxon produces oil in every continent except Antarctica and has offices or has cut deals in every major country around the world, and he's been a big part of that.
O'Reilly: So, a lot of people are in uproar, like, "Oh, they're picking him because he has ties to Russia and Putin and all this stuff --"
Muckerman: Well, sure he does, because Exxon has a pretty significant amount of their future business in Russia, but it's being frozen right now due to sanctions.
O'Reilly: Sure. I like the rebuttal -- obviously, we're not political here, I'm just saying -- I was reading yesterday that Henry Kissinger, the secretary of state under Nixon, he was saying, it's ridiculous, he would be useless to ExxonMobil were he not good at dealing with Russia and making oil deals and stuff, so, completely irrelevant.
Muckerman: I don't know how long they've been dealing with Russia, but I'm pretty sure he has not spent his whole career dealing with Russia.
O'Reilly: Well, no, certainly not.
Muckerman: So, he's obviously been successful outside of Siberia.
O'Reilly: In Soviet Russia, oil drills for you.
Muckerman: He did say that climate change is serious and warrants thoughtful action. So he's not a climate-change denier. But obviously, you would imagine, if push comes to shove, he's going to have the fossil-fuel industry's back. It's not a bad thing for the fossil-fuel industry that he is secretary of state. It's an asymmetric to the good side.
O'Reilly: He got endorsed by Condoleezza Rice. He got a number of very decent endorsements.
