Oil prices have rebounded well off of their 2016 lows and now appear to have stabilized in the $60-plus per barrel range. However, while some energy stocks have similarly recovered, others remain deeply out of favor with the market -- which presents an opportunity for investors. In addition to a value price, ExxonMobil Corp. (NYSE:XOM) and Buckeye Partners, L.P. (NYSE:BPL) also bring high dividend yields to the table. They are both worth a deep dive today.
ExxonMobil is one of the world's largest integrated energy giants. It produces oil and natural gas on the upstream side of its business and chemicals and refined products on the downstream side. This helps to even out its performance when energy prices are volatile -- a fairly common condition. This balanced model also speaks to the highly conservative culture of the energy giant, which is further highlighted by its impressive 36-year streak of annual dividend increases and its low debt level. (Long-term debt is just 10% of the capital structure.) 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
That conservatism, however, can leave it flat-footed when markets are moving quickly. That's exactly what's happening right now. ExxonMobil started pulling back on capital spending during the deep oil downturn that started in mid-2014, and has been late to hit the accelerator now that crude prices have recovered. For example, first-quarter earnings were up roughly 15% year over year, but many of its integrated peers have been doing better. For example, Royal Dutch Shell, which made a huge acquisition during the downturn, saw Q1 earnings advance nearly 63%.    
Another key problem is that ExxonMobil's production has been weak: It fell slightly in each of the last two years, and did so again, year over year, in Q1. Recently, the Motley Fool's Tyler Crowe described Exxon as "testing" its investors -- and that situation isn't likely to end for a couple of years, as the company's large growth projects aren't expected to add materially to its revenues or profits until 2020. In the meantime, investors get to watch capital spending rise with little return on that investment.

XOM PRICE TO TANGIBLE BOOK VALUE DATA BY YCHARTS
It's no wonder, then, that ExxonMobil's dividend yield is on the high side of its historical range at around 4%. And the company's tangible book value is lower than it has been since the late 1980s. Don't expect a quick turnaround, either, as large projects in Guyana, Brazil, and Mozambique, among other locations, will take time to develop. But once they are up and running -- they'll account for roughly half of the energy giant's upstream earnings by 2025 -- investors will likely reward ExxonMobil stock with a higher valuation. It is also working on large new downstream projects that will help to boost results, but they too are a few years from completion.   
While these long-term plans play out, however, patient investors can collect large yields backed by a growing dividend at a conservative energy company. That's a worthwhile trade-off in my opinion.
Buckeye Partners is a relatively small midstream energy limited partnership, and a more aggressive play for investors. The partnership's core assets are pipelines and storage. It differentiates itself from many of its peers because it has a truly international presence, with storage assets located in the Caribbean, Europe, Asia, and the Middle East. The problem is that Buckeye's distribution coverage ratio has been notably weak, falling to just 1 in 2017. Investors are worried that the partnership's current round of capital spending will compel it to cut the distribution.   
That's not an unreasonable expectation. However, management has steadfastly continued to assert that it will support the dividend. As recently as June 5, they stated: "Given our current outlook, we have no intentions of cutting Buckeye's distribution." And a cut would likely be a last-resort move, given that the partnership has increased its distribution annually for 22 consecutive years. Moreover, management has taken the long view before, letting the coverage ratio fall below 1 in 2013 and 2014 while it waited for investments to bear fruit.   

BPL FINANCIAL DEBT TO EBITDA (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS
The partnership is also fairly conservative financially, with a debt-to-EBITDA ratio of around 4.9, which isn't particularly out of line with its midstream peers or its own history. However, the fear of a distribution cut is a big headwind in an asset class that's specifically designed to push income through to unit holders, which is why Buckeye's distribution yield is a massive 14% today.
The partnership doesn't expect to issue any new units through the end of 2019, which would make it even harder to cover distributions. Although the recent use of hybrid debt and issuance of a new class of units that have a payment in kind distribution (which temporarily allows the partnership to avoid cash distributions on the units) suggests Buckeye is getting aggressive in order to raise non-dilutive cash, management believes that it still has plenty of financing options available should it need additional funds. Buckeye is openly calling 2018 a transition year, with major projects, like expansions in Texas, Chicago, and Michigan/Ohio, not expected to add materially to the top or bottom lines until 2019 or 2020.     
If you can take the long view along with management, Buckeye's huge yield is worth the risk for investors who can handle a little uncertainty. When coverage picks back up, the market is likely to push the unit price higher.
Exxon and Buckeye have very different investment profiles: One's a large and conservative company, and the other's relatively small, but willing to take some short-term risks to grow its business. Exxon, with its roughly 4% yield, is a good option for investors looking for a safe investment that's out of favor. Buckeye is appropriate for more aggressive types willing to handle the uncertainty of weak distribution coverage today in exchange for a huge 14% yield, and plans that should fix the company's issues starting in 2019.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


It's not hard to find stocks with rich dividend yields. A quick screener shows 355 tickers that combine billion-dollar market caps with dividend yields north of 4%.
The trick is to separate high-quality income generators from their lower-quality peers. So we asked a few of your fellow investors here at The Motley Fool to share their best dividend ideas with yields of 4% or more. Read on to see why they recommend tech titan International Business Machines (NYSE:IBM), international telecom Orange (NYSE:ORAN), and energy giant ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM).
Dan Caplinger (ExxonMobil): The energy sector has seen a lot of volatility in recent years, with oil prices having plunged from triple-digit levels all the way down below the $30-per-barrel market before rebounding convincingly. Yet crude oil hasn't regained all of its lost ground, and nervousness about the tenuous nature of the energy market's recovery has left even shareholders in industry stalwart ExxonMobil unconvinced about the industry's future.
Even as the oil giant's dividend has continued to rise, share prices at ExxonMobil have dropped, and that's been enough to give the stock an attractive 4.1% dividend yield right now.
ExxonMobil's major stumbling block has been that it has had increasing difficulty finding ways to replace production, having fallen behind some of its most prominent rivals in pursuing new lucrative projects. The oil giant has long been an industry leader, and it has the financial capacity and determination to use its position as leverage to get involved in deals that smaller companies can't afford to pursue. 
It could take a while for ExxonMobil's earnings results to catch up to its ambitious plans, but eventually, the company is in a good position to make good on its strategic promises to its core investors.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Tim Green (International Business Machines): IBM raised its dividend for the 23rd consecutive year back in April, boosting the quarterly payout to $1.57 per share. The tech company has paid uninterrupted quarterly dividends since 1916. Based on the current price, IBM stock yields about 4.3%.
Why does IBM, a company with a vast global customer base and a century-long track record of adaptation, sport such a high dividend yield? The stock has been beaten down since peaking in 2013, the result of a turnaround that has taken until now to return the company to growth. Investments in cloud computing and artificial intelligence are paying off, but declining sales in legacy businesses are offsetting that growth.
IBM isn't a growth company, partially by design. "Tech is littered with areas that you can have high growth and make no money. That's not us," said IBM CEO Ginni Rometty at a conference in 2015. The company's long-term target is to grow revenue by a low single-digit percentage each year. That's not a very exciting goal.
But IBM doesn't need to move mountains. The stock trades for around 10.5 times adjusted earnings guidance and has a dividend yield well above 4%. In other words, expectations are low. Dividend investors looking for a high yield along with a chance of some serious capital gains should consider IBM. It won't take much to get the stock moving in the right direction.
Anders Bylund (Orange): The company formerly known as France Telecom offers a somewhat unusual dividend policy. The payouts don't always rise year over year, the way you might expect from an American dividend hero. Instead, the company adjusts its payouts up and down as needed, responding to cash flow trends and upcoming expenses.
Over the last five years, Orange's trailing dividend payouts have bounced around between $1.3 billion and $1.8 billion.
What's more, the normal cadence of quarterly dividend checks is replaced by a biannual schedule -- Orange sends out those dividends once every six months.
European investors are used to these things, even if Americans aren't.
Either way, Orange's current dividend yield stands at a fantastic 5.6%. The stock has been lagging the overall market in recent years, hampered by the rise of low-cost rivals in France and other major European markets. In the long run, Orange's growth strategy hinges on high-speed broadband services and expansion in underdeveloped markets such as Poland and Romania. That's the one service consumers in western Europe are still willing to pay a premium for.
The company is also exploring Africa in a big way with mobile networks in 21 countries on that continent. Thirteen of these markets have fast and reliable 4G networks already and the rest will follow.
So Orange's dividend payments may be a little bumpy and unpredictable, but the business foundation is strong and I expect healthy growth for many years to come. The dividends will follow suit, and it's hard to complain about a nearly 6% payout based on an undervalued stock.



Before you consider International Business Machines Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and International Business Machines Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


