Last month was a rough one for oil giant ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM). Its stock tumbled after reporting fourth-quarter results in early February -- enduring its worst day since 2011 -- a slide that continued the next day as investors dug in deeper into the report and began growing increasingly concerned that the ExxonMobil was falling behind its peers. By the end of the month, shares of the oil giant had tumbled 15%, wiping a stunning $60 billion off its market cap.
One of ExxonMobil's issues is that it hasn't invested enough money developing projects to offset the natural decline rate of its legacy oil fields. As a result, output dropped 3% last quarter to 3.98 million barrels of oil equivalent per day (BOE/D). It's a problem the company plans to address in the coming years by ramping up its investment spending, which could boost output 1 million BOE/D by 2025. While impatient investors might want ExxonMobil to pursue a quick fix like making a needle-moving acquisition, that likely wouldn't pay off as much as its current strategy in the coming years.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
In response to its weak fourth-quarter results, ExxonMobil outlined an aggressive growth plan earlier this month that would double earnings and cash flow by 2025. It intends on getting there by significantly ramping up its investments, calling for $24 billion in capital spending this year, which should rise to $28 billion in 2019 before averaging about $30 billion annually from 2023 to 2025. That increase in spending was "the price you pay for cash flow," according to CEO Darren Woods, who further noted that every $1 ExxonMobil spent on capital expenses over the past decade produced $1.20 in operating cash flow. That plan would put the company on pace to generate more than $60 billion in annual operating cash flow by 2025, assuming $50 oil.
While ExxonMobil expects several resource plays to fuel that growth, two will drive the bulk of its strategy. First, the company anticipates a fivefold increase in output from its Permian Basin resource through 2025. One of the catalysts of that growth is last year's $6.6 billion purchase of Bass, which gives the company access to more than 4,800 high-return drilling locations in the region. The other main fuel is the oil giant's massive offshore resource discovery in Guyana. ExxonMobil expects the first phase of that find to come online by 2020, with further ones powering growth through 2025.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
ExxonMobil's strategy would see it spend an astonishing $230 billion over the next eight years to add about $30 billion to annual cash flow, assuming $50 oil. That's about a 13% yield on that investment, though as Woods pointed out, the company could ultimately earn a total return of 120% on that outlay. For comparison's sake, an alternative option to grow cash flow would be to make a significant acquisition. Given ExxonMobil's size and balance sheet strength, it could go in almost any direction, though the following three oil companies stand out given their ability to produce gobs of cash flow right now.
If ExxonMobil wanted to move the needle quickly, U.S. oil giant ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP) would be a prime target considering it has an enterprise value of nearly $73 billion. While that represents a hefty price tag, ConocoPhillips would provide an immediate cash flow boost since it produced $7.1 billion last year when oil averaged $50 a barrel. Though to put that into perspective, it's a less-than-10% cash flow yield on the purchase price, and that's without any deal premium or financing costs, suggesting this prospective purchase wouldn't earn ExxonMobil as high a return as its capital program could. 
The company would face a similar issue if it bought EOG Resources (NYSE:EOG), which currently has a $64 billion price tag. For a company that's on pace to produce more than $6 billion in cash flow this year at $50 oil, that too represents a less-than-10% return. Anadarko Petroleum (NYSE:APC), meanwhile, has a current value of $44.5 billion. While it's also a cash flow machine and can produce $4.6 billion at $50 oil this year, that's only a slightly more than 10% return if ExxonMobil gobbled it up. However, it is worth noting that all three are on pace to produce much more cash this year at current oil prices, with EOG expecting to generate more than $1.5 billion in free cash flow while Anadarko's on pace for at least $1 billion in excess cash this year. However, ExxonMobil's plan would also generate more at that oil price. In other words, the company would likely create the most value with its current strategy of investing in high-return expansion projects than by making a large acquisition.  
ExxonMobil doesn't need to make an acquisition to create value for investors since it can invest in its resource base and double its cash flow in eight years, and likely earn a higher return in the process. While that strategy requires more patience from investors, in time that plan should make the company's recent stumble seem like a distant memory.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


After last quarter's earnings report, there was some concern that ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) was just spinning its wheels and didn't have a coherent plan to grow the business in this low oil price environment. At the time, management was shorter on details than usual -- which is saying something, because ExxonMobil is typically a pretty tight-lipped organization. It appears, though, that it was waiting until its most recent analyst meeting to provide investors with details about its plans for the future. 
Based on the things management highlighted in this presentation, the next half-decade is likely going to be a big one for ExxonMobil. Here are five takeaways from the company's analyst meeting that should give investors an idea of what's coming down the pipe.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Historically, ExxonMobil has been the one company in the industry that invests in the business through thick and thin. It has been a significant reason the company has maintained higher rates of return than its peers for decades. During this most recent oil downturn, though, management uncharacteristically elected to lower capital spending as it completed projects to preserve its balance sheet and dividend payments as much as possible. 
It appears that this flirtation with belt-tightening will come to an end, though, as management plans to ratchet up its capital budget over the next few years. 
IMAGE SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL INVESTOR PRESENTATION.
With oil prices where they are today, the idea of Exxon increasing its capital spending plan to around $35 billion annually by 2020 sounds a little frightening. Looking at the oil and gas industry, though, it appears to be a bet that we could be headed for a bit of a supply crunch in a few years.
Exxon, its peers, and just about every other producer out there concentrated spending on either maintaining existing production levels or trying to squeeze a little more out of existing assets from 2015-2017. The trade-off for that is a much sharper drop off in production later on and a shorter reservoir life. With those existing assets now likely on shorter time windows and a general lack of investment in new production sources, there is a good chance that oil supply could be tight by the end of the decade, so Exxon wants to ramp up spending now to capture that market when it comes.
The largest knock on ExxonMobil recently has been a complete lack of production growth in recent years. While it has brought on a few new production sources, it hasn't been nearly enough to offset the declines across the rest of the portfolio. 
With this new capital spending plan, though, Exxon expects to deliver 25 new major projects and increase its production of shale oil in the Permian Basin by five fold. Combined, these should grow net production by an additional 1 million barrels of oil equivalent per day. That puts Exxon's production growth plans on the high end of its peers, which is a major turnaround from just a few months ago, when its production plans looked meager by comparison. 
Increasing capital spending and production by such large amounts sounds great, but there is probably a small voice in the back of your head saying, "what if oil prices fall again?"
It's a legitimate concern, and that's probably why management added this slide to its presentation. 
IMAGE SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL INVESTOR PRESENTATION.
That is pretty astounding if you step back and think about it for a second. Management estimates that it can grow cash flow from operations by 50% compared to 2017 if oil prices were to remain around $40 a barrel. 
Reading that, the first thing that comes to mind is "that's absurd." We saw what happened when oil went to $40 a barrel, and Exxon's cash from operations dried up fast. One of the ways management wants address this is to put a greater emphasis on investing in its downstream and chemical production capabilities.
Current CEO Darren Woods' predecessors -- Lee Raymond and Rex Tillerson -- both came from the upstream production side of the business. So, it should come as no surprise that much of the emphasis during that time was on growing production and backfilling its reserves with discoveries. Woods, on the other hand, is a downstream guy, and it's clear that he wants to round out the company's integrated model.
Between now and 2025, the company will start up operations at 13 new chemical production facilities worldwide -- seven of which should start up by the end of 2018. Much of that investment is going to the U.S. Gulf Coast region because of cheap feedstock costs. On top of that, the company is mulling an expansion of its Beaumont, Texas, refinery that would be the largest increase in U.S. refining capacity in decades.
By expanding its presence in refining, lubricants, and petrochemical manufacturing, ExxonMobil is helping to insulate some of its future cash flows from the ups and downs of oil prices. These businesses typically do well when production is struggling. It also helps that much of those new downstream assets will be located in a place where it can use its production from the Permian Basin, which should allow the company to extract more value out of each molecule.

XOM RETURN ON EQUITY (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS.
In a rather surprising turn of events, ExxonMobil temporarily lost its crown as the integrated oil and gas company with the highest return on equity in 2017. With this spending plan, though, management intends to not only recapture that title, but also put a lot of breathing room between it and the competition.
According to management, it will be able to achieve an average return on capital employed of 15% by 2025 with oil remaining around $60 a barrel, with considerable upside if we were to see an uptick in prices. If we do see a rise in prices, as the company's upstream spending plan suggests, then Exxon could produce some rather incredible returns over the next decade.
There is a lot to like in Exxon's strategic plan. While all investors will like growth in production and increasing rates of return, it's also encouraging to see that many of its spending plans seem relatively safe. Unlike the prior wave of investment that involved several mega projects in remote parts of the world, a lot of these investments are in more known quantities, which makes for a safer bet. The riskiest projects in this plan are for its offshore Guyana project and a massive LNG export terminal in Mozambique. If there was one critique of this plan, it's that the company still seems to be underinvesting in alternatives to its existing business that may be needed further down the road.
If investors were at all concerned about Exxon's future as an investment over the next few years, though, this plan should put those concerns to bed. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


