Dividend investing is a strategy that gives investors two sources of potential profit: one, the predictable income from regular dividend payments, and two, capital appreciation of the stock over time. Buying dividend stocks can be a great approach for investors looking to generate income or to build wealth by reinvesting dividend payments.
Buying dividend stocks is a strategy that can also be appealing to investors looking for lower-risk investments. Stocks that pay dividends can be some of the least volatile to own. But there are still pitfalls, and dividend stocks can be risky if you don't know what to avoid.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Let's look at an example. Say you buy 100 shares of a company for $10 each, and each share pays a $0.30 annual dividend. You would have invested $1,000, and over the course of a year receive $30 in dividend payments. That works out to a 3% yield -- not too shabby. What you choose to do with your dividends is up to you. You can:
Regardless of whether the company's stock price goes up or down, you would receive those dividend payments as long as the company continues to disburse them.
The beauty of stocks that pay dividends is that part of your return includes predictable quarterly payments. Not every company offering dividend stocks can maintain a dividend payout in every economic environment -- something that the COVID-19 pandemic has demonstrated -- but a diversified portfolio of dividend stocks can get you reliably paid, rain or shine. 
Combine those dividends with capital appreciation as the companies that you own grow in value, and the total returns can rival and even exceed those of the broader market. 
Here are some well-known companies that have a long history of paying dividends, listed along with their dividend yields at recent stock prices and the per-share amount of each dividend:
Company
Industry
Dividend Yield
Quarterly Dividend Amount
3M (NYSE:MMM)
Industrial
3.6%
$1.47
Procter & Gamble (NYSE:PG)
Consumer defensive
2.4%
$0.791
Lowe's (NYSE:LOW)
Consumer cyclical
1.4%
$0.60
DIVIDEND YIELD AND AMOUNT AS OF JAN. 18, 2021. DIVIDEND AMOUNT IS MOST RECENT PER-SHARE QUARTERLY DIVIDEND PAID. 
All three of these companies have increased their stock dividends for more than 50 consecutive years. Because of that, they're in an elite group of companies known as the Dividend Kings, and part of the Dividend Aristocrats -- companies with more than 25 years of consecutive dividend increases. Dividend stocks can come from just about any industry, and the amount of the dividend and percentage yield can vary greatly from one company to the next.
Before you buy any dividend stocks, it's important to know how to evaluate them. These metrics can help you to understand how much in dividends to expect, how reliable a dividend might be, and most importantly, how to identify red flags.

Inexperienced dividend investors often make the mistake of buying stocks with the highest dividend yields. While high-yield stocks aren't bad, high yields are typically the result of a stock's price falling due to the risk of the dividend being cut. That's a dividend yield trap. 
Here are some steps that you can take to avoid falling for a yield trap:
Sadly, a yield that looks too good to be true often is. It's better to buy a dividend stock with a lower yield that's rock solid than to chase a high yield that may prove illusory. Moreover, focusing on dividend growth -- a company's history and ability to raise its stock dividend -- often proves more profitable. 
Most dividend stocks pay "qualified" dividends, which, depending on your tax bracket, are taxed at a rate of 0% to 20%. That range is significantly lower than the ordinary income tax rates of 10% to 37% or more (an additional 3.8% tax is levied on certain investment income for the highest earners).
While most dividends qualify for the lower tax rates, some dividends are classified as "ordinary" or non-qualified dividends and taxed at your marginal tax rate. Several kinds of stocks are structured to pay high dividend yields and may come with higher tax obligations because of their corporate structures. The two most common are real estate investment trusts, or REITs, and master limited partnerships, or MLPs. 
Of course, this extra tax burden doesn't apply if your dividend stocks are held in a tax-advantaged retirement plan such as an Individual Retirement Account (IRA),with the caveat that investing in MLPs can sometimes leave you owing taxes even on your IRA. 
If you're a long-term investor looking to grow your nest egg, one of the best things to do is use a dividend reinvesting plan, also called a DRIP. This powerful tool will take every dividend you earn and reinvest it -- without fees or commissions -- back into shares of that company. This simple set-it-and-forget-it tool is one of the easiest ways to put the power of time and compounding value to work in your favor. 
If you're building a portfolio to generate income today, it's important to remember that paying dividends isn't obligatory for a company in the same way that companies must make interest payments on bonds.And that means that if a company has to cut expenses, the dividend could be at risk. With this in mind, it's important to build your income portfolio with a margin of safety and to diversify across companies with different risk profiles. One way to effectively mitigate risk in your portfolio is by investing in a dividend-focused exchange-traded fund (ETF) or mutual fund. These fund options enable investors to own diversified portfolios of dividend stocks that generate passive income.
You cannot completely eliminate the risk of a dividend cut, but you can lower the risk to ensure that you generate enough income to meet your needs. If stable income is your goal, then focusing on high-quality companies with strong records of dividend growth is far more advisable than buying high-yield stocks that may turn out to be traps. 

Where to invest $1,000 right now
When investing geniuses David and Tom Gardner have a stock tip, it can pay to listen. After all, the newsletter they have run for over a decade, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has quadrupled the market.*
David and Tom just revealed what they believe are the ten best stocks for investors to buy right now¡¦
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021

