Income investors who take a quick look at Royal Dutch Shell plc's (NYSE:RDS.B) 6% dividend yield might be tempted to think it offers a better value than ExxonMobil Corporation (NYSE:XOM) with its 3.7% yield. There are good things taking shape at each of these integrated oil majors -- but when you look past the dividend yield, Exxon appears to be the better value. Here's why.
During the worst of the oil downturn that started in mid-2014, Shell agreed to acquire BG Group. That move, which cost roughly $50 billion, helped increase the company's debt level by over 50% in 2016. Investors were clearly concerned, pushing shares down to the lowest price to tangible book value ratio they had seen in a decade at the start of 2017.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
But Shell has been working quickly to reduce that debt, having already agreed to or completed the sale of $25 billion worth of assets (out of a $30 billion target). And its return on invested capital, which has been hampered over the years by large profile misses like arctic drilling, has started to move higher too. Management believes it can get that number up to 10%, even if oil prices are in the $60 a barrel range. That's a higher return than Shell managed between 2013 and 2016, when oil averaged $90 a barrel.
Add in oil prices that have solidified in the $50 a barrel range and investor concerns about Shell appear to have waned. The company's price to tangible book value is back up toward the top of the range it has traded in for most of the past decade. I wouldn't call it expensive, per se, but it appears to be fairly valued at present.
Bottom line: investors have clearly already rewarded Shell for the improvements it's made.
Then there's Exxon, which, despite the lower yield, could offer income investors a better value proposition. This energy giant's price to tangible book value, for example, is up from its lows but still near the lowest levels of the past decade. That might make you think that Exxon is struggling to deal with headwinds that Shell has easily surmounted. But that's not the case.

XOM PRICE TO TANGIBLE BOOK VALUE DATA BY YCHARTS
For example, Exxon took on debt during the downturn to support its dividend and capital spending, as most oil majors did. However, it didn't take on a giant acquisition like Shell. Repairing the balance sheet, which remains quite strong despite the added leverage, isn't as worrying an issue.
Meanwhile, Exxon has long been an industry leader when it comes to return on invested capital. It has proven year in and year out that it is among the best-run oil companies in the world. Yes, returns took a hit during the energy downturn, but like Shell they are starting to turn higher again. Note in the graph below that Exxon's returns remain higher than Shell's even today.

RDS.B RETURN ON INVESTED CAPITAL (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS
And then there's the future. Exxon has two sizable catalysts for production growth:  the Permian Basin in the United States and an offshore field in Guyana. These opportunities don't appear to be priced into Exxon's valuation today.
Exxon's yield may be materially lower than Shell's, but that doesn't tell the whole story. Exxon has long been one of the best operators in the oil business, has a solid balance sheet, and has notable production growth opportunities ahead of it. But investors remain unimpressed.
Meanwhile, investors have rewarded Shell for its efforts to dig itself out of a balance sheet hole and for improving its lagging capital investment results. That's not to suggest that Shell is a bad company or even a bad investment: if you are searching for a high yield, it appears fairly valued today. But if you want a high yield and a good value, Exxon looks like the better opportunity right now.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


The stock market has been powering higher, with a few corrections scattered here and there, for the better part of a decade. Since bottoming out in early 2009, the S&P 500 index has gained nearly 270%, an epic run that has fattened brokerage accounts, 401(k)s, and IRAs of those invested in this bull market.
All bull markets eventually come to an end, and this one is no exception. Exactly when this end will come is unknown -- and unknowable -- but investors can be sure that stocks can't simply go up forever. What should you do with your money in an aging bull market? Three of our Foolish investors think investing in ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), Bed Bath & Beyond (NASDAQ:BBBY), and Las Vegas Sands (NYSE:LVS) are good options.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Dan Caplinger (ExxonMobil): The bull market in stocks has gone on for more than eight years now, and defensively minded investors want companies that can stand up to the next downturn in the market. ExxonMobil has shown in recent years that its share-price trajectory doesn't necessarily match up with that of the overall stock market, and the oil giant is working hard to take maximum advantage of tough conditions in the energy market to shore up its business and find new opportunities for growth.
ExxonMobil has a long track record of rewarding its shareholders with growing dividends, as annual increases have happened for 35 years in a row. Yet despite its mature business, ExxonMobil still has tricks up its sleeve to stay ahead of the pack. For instance, over the past couple of years, a surprise find off the coast of South America turned out to be far more lucrative than expected, and that exploration effort has continued to pay off for the energy giant, with more recent discoveries that have expanded the scope of reserves there.
A lot depends on what brings down the bull market, but ExxonMobil has the benefit of being more tied to oil prices than to the stock market at large. Indeed, if rising oil prices themselves cause the next recession, then it's entirely possible that ExxonMobil stock could gain ground, even as more consumer-driven companies suffer.
Tim Green (Bed Bath & Beyond): With the market punching out new all-time highs nearly every day, many stocks are trading at optimistic valuations. This bull market may continue for some time, and those valuations may get even more optimistic. But paying escalating prices to avoid missing out on potential gains is a dangerous course of action.
One reasonable strategy for this aging bull market: Buy a stock that already has overwhelming pessimism baked into the price. Bed Bath & Beyond, a struggling home goods retailer, is a great example. The company's profits have been contracting for years, as online retailers scoop up market share, and comparable sales have started to decline at a worrying rate. But with the stock trading for just seven times the average analyst estimate for fiscal 2018 earnings, there's a lot of upside if the company performs better than the market is expecting.
Investing in Bed Bath & Beyond comes with plenty of risk, too. The company has shown no sign that a turnaround in sales or profits will take place any time soon, and a recently announced realignment of store management could be a precursor to store closings. But if you don't want to pay dozens of times earnings for stocks that have soared over the past few years, a risky but potentially lucrative turnaround play like Bed Bath & Beyond could be the way to go.
Travis Hoium (Las Vegas Sands): We're in the ninth year of a bull market, and investors looking for value in this aging bull market may have to look well beyond blue chip and well-known stocks. One company that I think is well set up for such a market -- and any potential pullback -- is Las Vegas Sands, the gaming company that dominates the Asia market. 
Las Vegas Sands has spent most of the last decade building out a massive fleet of casinos in Macau and Singapore, where it has highly coveted gaming licenses. In Macau, the company has five major resorts, and four on the booming Cotai Strip. In Singapore, it has one of two casinos in the country. The result has been the tremendous growth in revenue and adjusted EBITDA, a measure of cash flow, that you see below. 

LVS REVENUE (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS.
What investors should like about Las Vegas Sands in 2017 isn't its potential for growth, as it is long past its expansion phase. Instead, they should like the cash flow consistently coming into the company and the relatively low debt load of $7.8 billion. Even as this bull market ages, Las Vegas Sands will continue to churn out cash to pay dividends or pay down debt. And if the bull market ends, it has an enviable position as Asia's biggest gaming company to fall back on. That's a great position for investors to be in. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


