
IMAGE SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL.
Investing in the energy industry has been a rather harrowing experience over the past two years. Lower oil and gas prices have wreaked havoc on stock prices, and likely taken the value of investors' portfolios with them. Times like this remind us that sometimes it's best to maintain a group of investments that provide a certain level of stability through consistent dividend payments. In energy, there aren't a whole lot of companies that have a reputation of maintaining a dividend over the long term, but there are a select bunch of Dividend Aristocrats that have stood the test of time
So we asked three of our contributors to highlight an energy Dividend Aristocrat investors should consider for their portfolios today. Here's what they had to say.
Tyler Crowe
Finding Dividend Aristocrats in the energy space isn't as easy as you might originally think. The ups and downs of commodity prices can make a company's cash flow -- and dividend payments -- evaporate. Even utility companies with their regulated businesses haven't been the most reliable dividend payers over that 25-year time frame. One company that has managed to maintain those dividend payments for an impressive 42 years straight, though, is Helmerich & Payne (NYSE:HP), and the reason it should be on investors' radars isn't what you might think.
As a lessor of drilling rigs to exploration and production companies, Helmerich & Payne is just as subject to the ups and downs of the business. Furthermore, it is a fiercely competitive market that doesn't normally garner pricing power. Despite this tougher operating environment, Helmerich & Payne has been able to maintain its consistent dividend payments thanks to a great management team that has been very good at allocating capital and managing the company through tough times.
Today, Helmerich & Payne has the largest fleet of rigs that are capable of the tougher drilling needed to complete hydraulic fracturing jobs. Unlike many of its peers that loaded up on debt to build out those fleets, Helmerich & Payne has more cash on hand than debt outstanding and is still generating enough cash to cover its capital spending and dividend payments.
Today's operating environment is one of the toughest that rig companies have ever faced, and if the company were to ever cut its dividend, now would be the time. With more than four decades of consecutive payments under its belt, though, the company is going to be hard pressed to end that streak. Based its track record so far, you as an investor can be reasonably sure that management has your best interests in mind. 
Chuck Saletta
Unless you live directly in its limited natural gas and electric service area, you may not know UGI (NYSE:UGI) by name. But you're much more likely to be familiar with the propane distribution business where UGI is the general partner: AmeriGas (NYSE:APU). AmeriGas is America's largest retail propane marketer, and as the general partner, UGI controls and profits from AmeriGas' operations. In addition to its utility and domestic propane business, UGI is a major LPG (liquified petroleum gas) distributor in Europe.
That combination of both a utility business and an energy distribution business is what gave UGI the financial wherewithal to become -- and remain -- a Dividend Aristocrat. UGI has paid a dividend for over 130 years, and it has increased that dividend annually for the past 28.
UGI is reaching the anniversary of its most recent dividend increase, so we should find out shortly if it is able to maintain that streak. With a payout ratio of around 44% of earnings, UGI does have room to continue increasing that payment in line with its business growth. At a time when many energy related companies are slashing their dividends, it's good to see one energy sector Dividend Aristocrat with a chance to keep its record of increases alive.
Sean O'Reilly
My pick for an energy Dividend Aristocrat worthy of consideration by Foolish investors, ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), should come as no surprise. After all, it takes a truly special organization to steadily increase dividend payments every year for 33 years running. To do so in a commodity-based business, one that is subject to jarring price swings, is nothing short of fantastic. 
In spite of the difficult conditions that the oil and gas industry currently operates under, ExxonMobil has managed to remain respectably profitable. Net income for fiscal 2015 came in at $16.15 billion ($3.85 per share), a 50.33% drop from the previous year but more than understandable given what has occurred with the price of oil. Also, ExxonMobil's results more than covered the year's total dividend payments, which amounted to $12.09 billion ($2.88 per share). If any energy company can manage this, in light of what has happened to oil prices since fall 2014, I think it's safe to say it's a true aristocrat. 
Looking ahead, Wall Street analysts polled by S&P Global Market Intelligence project that ExxonMobil will earn $2.40 per share this year, $4.09 in 2017, and $4.68 in 2018. These results should more than cover future dividend payments. Clearly, fueled by its refining and retail operations, ExxonMobil is capable of holding its own no matter what the industry environment. 
It's not often that one has the opportunity to pick up shares in a Dividend Aristocrat amid what amounts to, most likely, an impermanent downturn. ExxonMobil, a truly integrated player in the energy industry, remains a stock that all Foolish investors should strongly consider. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021



IMAGE SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL CORPORATE WEBSITE.
Slowly but steadily, ExxonMobil's (NYSE:XOM) earnings have been on the decline ever since oil prices started on their downward trajectory. This quarter resulted in the lowest earnings results since 1999. As bad as that sounds, there is something to keep in mind here: ExxonMobil remains profitable. That's something that not a lot of oil and gas companies can say.
Let's take a quick look at this quarter's results, and what investors can expect in the coming months as the company continues to deal with bottom-of-the-barrel oil prices.  
By the numbers
SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL EARNINGS RELEASES AND S&P CAPITAL IQ.
This quarter was the first quarter where ExxonMobil's upstream production unit slid into a loss, and all of that loss came from the company's U.S.-based operations. At the same time, refining margins were a bit weaker in the fist quarter, which led to a modest decline in downstream earnings. The one saving grace for ExxonMobil this quarter was its chemical division, which performed very well, and made up for weakness elsewhere. Here's a quick breakdown of those results.

IMAGE SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL EARNINGS RELEASES, AUTHOR'S CHART.
From a cash-generating perspective, the company didn't fare much better than some of its peers. Capital spending declined about 33% from the same time last year, but the company didn't quite generate enough in operational cash flow to cover all spending needs. This left ExxonMobil with some funding gaps that needed to be plugged with debt. To be fair, though, the company saw a $1.8 billion build in working capital this quarter, which will likely decline in the coming quarters, and make cash-flow figures look better.
The operational highlights
Straight from management
The CIA would probably have a hard time getting ExxonMobil's management to say anything revealing about the business. The statement made by ExxonMobil CEO Rex Tillerson is very similar to the statement he makes every quarter: 
The organization continues to respond effectively to challenging industry conditions, capturing enhancements to operational performance and creating margin uplift despite low prices. The scale and integrated nature of our cash flow provide competitive advantage and support consistent strategy execution.
It may be a little frustrating that the company rarely ever gives investors a deeper look into what management is thinking. Then again, this is what you should expect from a company that prides itself on being consistent throughout the ups and downs of the commodity cycle. 
A look at the outlook
ExxonMobil plans to bring six more major projects online in 2016. One of them is the much beleaguered Kashagan facility in the Caspian Sea. This project has been the poster child for excessive spending and mega projects gone wrong for Big Oil companies, so finally turning it into a revenue generator will be a welcome change. Beyond that, the company still has a rather large suite of potential development projects it can tap, which suggests that today's declines in capital spending mean that they will get delayed rather than completely shelved. 
What a Fool believes
This quarter's results weren't great by any measure, but most of the things that affected the company's profitability were out of the company's control. One thing that should give some solace to ExxonMobil's investors is that it has managed to remain profitable during even these extremely difficult times, while its peers fall deeper and deeper into the red. We may not be at the end of low oil and gas prices, but ExxonMobil is showing that it can manage the situation much better than others.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


