Some of the biggest companies in the world are oil and gas companies, like giant ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.A) (NYSE:RDS.B). But just because you've heard of a stock doesn't necessarily mean it's a good investment.
The oil and gas industry has had a lot of ups and downs (mostly downs) over the past several years, leaving energy investors wondering whether oil companies -- even top oil companies -- deserve a spot in their portfolios. Let's dig a little deeper and see whether oil and gas stocks look like good long-term investments or not. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
No stock is completely safe, of course. Buying stocks always involves a certain amount of risk, and you could lose 100% of your investment if the company in which you've bought stock goes under. 
Petroleum-based fuels and natural gas usually have a cost advantage over other heating and transportation fuels, and they have a massive infrastructure advantage over emerging clean energy fuels. That said, the industry also has some negative features that increase risk for investors:
Given all these factors, oil and gas is a comparatively risky sector. That said, within the sector some companies are safer than others.
As in many other industries, the larger the company, the safer it's likely to be. For example, the so-called "oil supermajors" -- ExxonMobil, Royal Dutch Shell, BP, Chevron (NYSE:CVX), and the French Total SA (NYSE:TOT) -- with global operations and annual revenues of more than $100 billion, aren't going to go out of business anytime soon. Neither will large oil and gas exploration and production companies (E&Ps) like ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP), big pipeline companies like Kinder Morgan (NYSE:KMI), top refiners like Phillips 66 (NYSE:PSX), or major oil-field services companies like Schlumberger (NYSE:SLB).  
On the other hand, because oil and gas are cyclical commodities, price downturns can drive smaller oil and gas companies into bankruptcy. After the oil price downturn hit in 2014, many offshore rig operators went out of business or declared bankruptcy because of low demand for their services. In March 2020, as demand for fuel dried up due to the coronavirus pandemic, several smaller exploration and production companies filed for bankruptcy, including Whiting Petroleum and Chesapeake Energy.
So it's fair to say that -- generally speaking -- large oil and gas companies tend to be safer than small ones, at least when it comes to not going out of business. But just because a company's still in business doesn't mean it's an investment that will outperform.
20 years ago, top oil and gas stocks were big outperformers. That trend continued until 2008:

^SPX DATA BY YCHARTS
A growing global population needed more gasoline for its cars and natural gas for heating its homes. Increasing global use of plastics and jet fuel upped demand for oil and gas. Global production rose to meet that demand, and new pipelines, refineries, and export terminals were built to handle the increased production. More was considered better: more production, more pipelines, more refinery capacity. 
Unfortunately, production and capacity were starting to outstrip demand. The global recession that began in 2008 stalled the rapid growth of big oil and gas markets like India and China. Meanwhile, technological advances like horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing ("fracking") allowed companies to accelerate production, which contributed to global oversupply.
In 2014, crude oil prices crashed due to these and other factors. They crashed again in March 2020, as a result of the Saudi Arabia-Russia price war, and stayed depressed for months amid a drop in demand caused by the coronavirus pandemic. On Aug. 17, 2020, the S&P 500 officially set a new high, its first since its crash in March of that year. Here's the 10-year performance of those same top oil companies as of that date: 

^SPX DATA BY YCHARTS
Although all of these companies badly underperformed the broader stock market, most still outperformed the industry: Note how the SPDR S&P Oil & Gas Explor & Prodtn ETF (NYSEMKT:XOP) -- the dark-green line -- has fallen by more than 65%, indicating that as a whole, the industry performed far worse than most of these stocks.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
While the global need for oil and gas is unlikely to vanish anytime soon, oil and gas stocks look like an increasingly uncertain long-term bet.
Certainly the global oversupply problem isn't going anywhere. Short-term production curtailments may come and go, but that supply is just sitting there, waiting to be tapped again. 
Meanwhile, clean energy alternatives may finally be reaching the tipping point. In 2020 Tesla became the largest car company in the world by market cap despite selling only battery-electric vehicles. A number of other electric car and truck companies went public in summer 2020, and all the major car companies began rolling out electric models. Even oil supermajor BP seems to see the writing on the wall: It announced in August 2020 that it would be cutting its oil and gas investments by 40% by 2030 and devoting $5 billion per year to renewable energy investments.
Top oil and gas companies -- particularly the oil supermajors -- are still offering attractive dividend yields and will likely appeal to dividend investors for years if not decades to come. However, most investors will want to look elsewhere for long-term growth and stability. 

Where to invest $1,000 right now
When investing geniuses David and Tom Gardner have a stock tip, it can pay to listen. After all, the newsletter they have run for over a decade, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has quadrupled the market.*
David and Tom just revealed what they believe are the ten best stocks for investors to buy right now¡¦
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021

