This past year might go down as the worst in ExxonMobil's (NYSE:XOM) history. Thanks to cratering oil prices, the oil giant lost billions of dollars through the third quarter and is expected to record a historic writedown approaching $20 billion for the fourth quarter. Exxon therefore failed to increase its dividend for the first time in decades. As a result, its stock price cratered 40%, which caused it to briefly lose the title of the country's largest oil company.
However, with this brutal year nearly in the books, it's time to look ahead at what 2021 might bring. Here's the case for and against seeing the oil giant bounce back in the coming year.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The main issue weighing on ExxonMobil's stock in 2020 was oil prices, which tumbled more than 20% on the year because the COVID-19 outbreak torpedoed demand. That slump cut into Exxon's cash flow, forcing it to slash capital spending and borrow heavily to bridge the gap.
However, 2021 could be a better year for oil prices. First, most industry watchers expect oil demand to recover sharply in 2021. For example, the International Energy Agency (IEA) anticipates that gasoline and oil demand will be "particularly strong" in 2021, returning to about 99% of their pre-pandemic levels. That should benefit both Exxon's oil production business and its refining assets. As a result, it should generate more cash in 2021, which could help take some of the pressure off its stock price. 
Another potential catalyst for the company in the coming year is an improvement in its balance sheet. Exxon's total debt rose by more than $20 billion from the third quarter of 2019 through the same period of this year. However, Exxon completed a review of its forward business plan in late 2020, which will see it prioritize its investments in its highest value assets. As a result, the company plans to sell its less strategic ones in the future, which would give it the cash to repay debt. 
If both oil prices and Exxon's balance sheet improve in 2021, it will help lift the weight on Exxon's stock price, which could bounce back sharply.
While there's reason to believe the coming year could be a much better one for ExxonMobil's stock, there are some downside risks that bear watching. Topping the list is the potential that oil prices might not recover much further in the coming year. Two factors could affect oil prices.
First, one of the potential drivers of a rebound in oil consumption is the anticipation that vaccines will roll out quickly in 2021, putting an end to the pandemic. However, it might take a lot longer than expected to get the virus under control, since vaccines might run into production issues, transportation problems, resistance from large swaths of the population, or ineffectiveness as the virus mutates. That could force governments to continue restricting travel, which would affect oil demand.
On the other hand, producers might start adding back supply too quickly, which could keep a lid on oil prices. As it stands right now, the IEA expects that it will take the economy a full year to burn off the current excess inventory. Thus, if producers restart their pumps too soon, it could cause storage levels to balloon once again and push prices lower.
In addition to those potential oil market issues, Exxon faces internal headwinds that might keep a lid on its stock price in 2021. For starters, the company has significantly reduced capital spending, which will probably cause its production to decline in the coming year. Meanwhile, it might have trouble selling assets, which could affect its ability to repay debt. If that happens, the company might have no choice but to reduce its dividend.
On the one hand, it seems reasonable to believe that ExxonMobil's stock could rebound in 2021. If the vaccines give the global economy a shot in the arm, causing oil demand and prices to bounce back, oil stocks like Exxon should follow.
However, plenty of downside risks remain for the oil market. On top of that, the oil market might recover, but Exxon could continue to sputter if its business underperforms expectations and its balance sheet doesn't improve. It's no sure thing that Exxon's stock bounces back in the coming year.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


The shift toward clean energy is leading some investors to question future demand for fossil fuels -- but contrarians might find that this is the time to invest in the sector. According to BP, 84% of the world's energy needs are still met by fossil fuels, which means that even if usage declines, demand will remain enormous. Clean energy might be the future, but fossil fuels are the present. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
Consider again that fossil fuels still provide 84% of the world's energy needs. All of the world's planes fly on fossil fuel. How long would it take to retire all the current planes and replace them with say, solar-powered planes? How much money would that cost an industry that's already decimated by the pandemic?
The vast majority of the world's cars are gasoline-powered. And even California, perhaps the most progressive state, has allotted a decade and a half before mandating that in 2035 all new car sales will have to be from zero-emission vehicles.
The cost of solar and wind power has declined by more than two-thirds in the past decade, making them an increasingly attractive energy source. But even aggressive proposals for the shuttering of coal plants forecast a rather lengthy 15-year transition period. And while coal seems to be on a slow decline, natural gas remains popular. In 2019, a third of all newly constructed U.S. power plants were powered by natural gas. 
In other words, even if the world wanted to abandon fossil fuels, doing so would take many decades. But in all likelihood, the whole world does not, in fact, want to move to clean energy. Consider this: The energy sector is responsible for 10% of the Canadian economy, as measured by gross domestic product (GDP.) In Saudi Arabia, that share is even higher; 50% of GDP comes from oil and gas. Russia is the world's second-largest natural gas producer, and the third-largest producer of oil. Do these countries want the world to move away from fossil fuels? Probably not.  
Structural demand for fossil fuels provides intermediate-term support. In the shorter run, the International Energy Agency estimates that the pandemic reduced global energy demand by 5%. While fallout from COVID-19 will likely be felt for several more years, effective vaccines should eventually lead to a resumption of "normal" work, leisure, and travel, which could lead to higher energy demand. And that increased demand would occur right at a time when supply is shrinking.
Last spring's price collapse and COVID-related demand declines resulted in 35 North American energy producers declaring bankruptcy in just the second and third quarters of 2020, which will reduce future supply. And the OPEC+ organization, which represents a combination OPEC and non-OPEC oil-producing nations (such as Russia), recently lowered its planned 2021 oil supply increase from 2 million barrels per day to 0.5 million barrels per day.  These future supply reductions will likely help support prices as demand recovers.
Even if the price of energy stocks stagnates in the near term, investors in some cases are getting paid well to wait. Beaten-down prices combined with steady dividend payouts have resulted in especially high dividend yields.
Between 2015 and the end of 2019, the dividend yield on Exxon (NYSE:XOM) fluctuated between 3.4% and 5%. Early in 2020, that yield jumped to 5.8%, and today it stands at 8.35%. Chevron currently yields (NYSE:CVX) 6.03%, after bouncing between 3.5% and 5% during the previous five years. Looking abroad, BP (NYSE:BP) is yielding 6.11%, and Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.A) yields a lower, but still attractive, 3.78%. 
Of course, if energy prices and profits remain low, there is no guarantee that companies will be able to maintain their current dividend payments. Over the past decade, Exxon has only covered 67% of its dividend payments through free cash flow. For Chevron, that number is 52%, and for BP 25%. Shell is the comparative "winner," but even there only 80% of dividends have been covered by free cash flow. The remainder of shareholder payouts have come from borrowing, asset sales, or reductions in cash reserves. And those figures only cover the period through 2019. The impact of the pandemic will only exacerbate the challenges these companies have faced in the past decade. 
But given the essential role energy, and energy companies, play in the global economy, it seems unlikely the sector will disappear anytime soon. If you have the opportunity to collect a few fat dividend checks from stocks in a sector with attractive short-term supply and demand characteristics, why wouldn't you do so?



Before you consider Royal Dutch Shell plc, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Royal Dutch Shell plc wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


