Oil giants are surging today. The S&P 500 is up about 7.4%, and many supermajors are up double-digits, with some pushing 20% in gains today: 
AS OF 3:09 P.M. EDT. DATA SOURCE: YAHOO! FINANCE.
Today's huge surge is a product of a few things. First, the overall market's positive move is driving oil stocks higher, as investors count on Congress to reach an agreement on as much as $2 trillion in economic stimulus to businesses and individuals to help soften the blow from what looks like it will be a sharp fall into recession. 
In addition to government efforts to support an economy in free fall, the U.S. Federal Reserve has pledged to act aggressively to support the private bond market. This is a massively important move for the energy sector, which utilizes substantial amounts of debt to fund operations, and is probably the most at risk of seeing private lenders pull the plug, particularly in lending to shale-focused oil producers. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
There have also been rumors that the U.S. and Saudi Arabia are in talks to form a partnership to help stabilize oil markets. The U.S. Secretary of Energy acknowledged in an interview that this is an idea that's been floated. 
Add it all up, and investors are flooding capital back to what is seen as the most stable, safest part of the oil and gas sector: Massive, integrated companies with strong balance sheets and multiple ways to make money in the oil and gas business. 
Let me be as blunt as possible: It's very unlikely that the U.S. and Saudi Arabia will form an oil cartel. The reality is, between individual property and mineral rights, and hundreds of companies controlling America's oil reserves -- not the federal government outside the oil reserves on federal lands -- it would be immensely difficult to accomplish, and possibly not even legal. 
Moreover, investors need to be very conscious of the reality with oil markets today: This little bit of optimistic news doesn't do much to change the very real problems that the sector faces. In the weeks and months ahead, global oil markets are on track to become even more oversupplied than we have seen. Storage facilities are going to be overrun, even when factoring in the use of offshore tankers to serve as temporary storage. 
In other words, there very well could be far more pain to come, and investors need to act with that likelihood in mind. Today's huge gains could -- and likely will -- get wiped out in the weeks to come as the headlines change and reflect the coming glut of oil. That could send crude prices down even further from today's $27 per barrel for Brent crude and $23.90 for West Texas Intermediate, prices that simply won't pay the bills for even the best-capitalized oil major. 
That's not to say oil supermajors like the companies above (at least the integrated ones, meaning all but pure-play producer ConocoPhillips) should be avoided. I expect today's prices will look like fire-sale deals in a few years, once the economy and oil markets return to normal.
But there's a very good chance the next few months could be brutal. Invest accordingly. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


The 2019 coronavirus disease pandemic has had a huge impact on the global economy. Many blame the outbreak for the fight between Russia and OPEC that precipitated a massive sell-off in the crude oil markets, with prices falling as low as $20 per barrel. At those prices, even giants of the industry like ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) have seen their businesses come under considerable pressure. Exxon's stock is down about 55% just in 2020 alone, and it's been in a downward trend for several years now.
As a blue chip stock and a component in the Dow Jones Industrial Average, ExxonMobil has a wide following among investors. The oil giant is also a dividend stock favorite, because it has a long history of not only paying dividends consistently but also raising its payout amounts over time. With the coronavirus threat here, however, companies across the economy are looking at cutting their dividends. Facing a vulnerable situation, ExxonMobil has some people worried about the fate of its quarterly payout. With that in mind, we'll look below at ExxonMobil's history of dividend payments and whether current concerns are warranted.
Metric
Current Stat
Current quarterly dividend per share
$0.87
Current yield
10.6%
Number of consecutive years with dividend increases
37 years
Payout ratio (2020 estimated EPS)
188%
Last increase
May 2019
DATA SOURCE: YAHOO! FINANCE. LAST INCREASE REFERS TO EX-DIVIDEND DATE.
ExxonMobil has been able to increase its dividend every year dating back to the 1980s. That period encompasses some massive fluctuations in the oil and natural gas markets, including the following:
Yet even with all these perturbations in the energy markets, ExxonMobil's dividend hasn't wavered. The company has found ways to weather price declines while still delivering good-sized payout hikes, with the most recent boost last year taking the quarterly payout from $0.82 to $0.87 per share. In the past decade, ExxonMobil's quarterly dividend amount has more than doubled.
IMAGE SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL.
Now that's not to say that shareholders haven't felt the impact of industry downturns. In 2012, amid strong conditions in the oil markets, ExxonMobil gave its investors a 21% payout boost. By contrast, in 2016, when oil was down, the annual increase was just 3%. Nevertheless, there's never been much question that the company would deliver at least some dividend increase -- much less actually have to cut its payout.
Yet as with many companies facing the coronavirus pandemic, this could be an unprecedented situation for ExxonMobil. Those watching the oil company have slashed their earnings estimates for this year and next, with a more than 50% decline in 2020's bottom-line projection. That has ExxonMobil paying out almost twice the earnings that it's bringing in -- and on pace to keep outspending its net income at least through 2021.
Oil companies do have considerable noncash expenses that hit their earnings, making it important also to look at other measures. However, free cash flow has also sunk lately, going from $16.4 billion in 2018 to just $5.4 billion in 2019. Much of that came from massive capital spending that ExxonMobil now expects to cut, but it's still a danger sign.
For the company's part, ExxonMobil has emphasized its determination to keep boosting its dividend payments. Last year, it borrowed money to finance the payout, and it's likely to do so again this year and next if it needs to despite its cost-cutting measures. Yet the company just got a credit downgrade from bond rating agencies, and that shows that its borrowing capacity has limits.
At this point, dividend investors can expect ExxonMobil to do everything it can to avoid cutting its dividend. Whether it's successful depends on how long oil prices remain at rock-bottom levels and whether the company can keep borrowing as necessary to support its payouts. If conditions deteriorate far enough to stop that, then ExxonMobil could find itself forced to make the dividend cut it so badly wants to avoid.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


