
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
When buying Dividend Aristocrats, you are buying the creme de la creme of stocks out there. These are companies that have been paying a dividend -- and growing that payment -- since 1991. A lot has happened since then, and some of these companies have held onto dividend increase streaks for even longer than that. It's hard to argue against buying Dividend Aristocrats because they have displayed a remarkable consistency for long periods of time. At the same time, though, that doesn't mean every one of them is a buy today. Buying a great company can be a less-than-great investment if you pay a hefty premium. 
Looking across the landscape of Dividend Aristocrats, here are three that stand out as worth buying today: Emerson Electric (NYSE:EMR), ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), and Nucor (NYSE:NUE). All three have generated fantastic returns for shareholders over the long run. 

EMR TOTAL RETURN PRICE DATA BY YCHARTS.
Also, their shares look to be selling at a price that looks pretty attractive. Here's why each looks so compelling today. 
Emerson is in rare company when it comes to dividend payments. It has raised its dividend annually for 59 years -- that's all the way back in the Dwight D. Eisenhower administration! Over that time frame, the company's business has grown and diversified from its roots as an electric motor and fan manufacturer into a manufacturing giant with products ranging from its bread-and-butter power motors, climate technologies, industrial automation equipment, and more consumer-facing commercial and residential supplies.
As a global manufacturer, the company's results can waiver with the broader health of the global economy. With emerging market growth slowing and continued anemic growth in the more mature markets like Europe and the U.S., Emerson's results have left investors a little wanting as of late. That's probably why shares now trade for an enterprise value-to-EBITDA ratio of 9.9 times, a rate that is below the company's average valuation over the past 20 years. It's times like this that can make a great company into a great stock. Emerson's dividend yield was this high back in the depths of the Great Recession.
Emerson can't control the rate of global economic growth, but to help make up for tepid growth environment into which it sells, the company is looking to cut operating costs and improve returns on capital. If they come to fruition, then even weak growth shouldn't hamper it from continuing its dividend streak. 
It's rare for a company like ExxonMobil to sell for what you might consider cheap. Its business model of owning assets in every part of the oil and gas value chain means that it isn't nearly as affected by the ups and downs of oil prices. It also helps that its management is one of the best at investing in high-return projects, keeping them on time and on budget, and generating long-term value for shareholders. 
Thanks to the long decline in oil prices, though, we are in one of those uncommon periods where the company's stock is selling at a pretty decent discount compared to its historical average. Since there is some volatility in it its earnings power from commodity prices, the most consistent metric for comparing ExxonMobil's stock value over time is its price-to-tangible book value. Based on this metric, shares of ExxonMobil are trading well below the average over the past 20 years. 

XOM PRICE-TO-TANGIBLE BOOK VALUE DATA BY YCHARTS.
When you add in its 33-year history of raising dividends and today's yield of 3.1%, shares of ExxonMobil look pretty tempting to buy and hang on for a very long time. 
Manufacturing steel has been a common practice for well over 100 years. When Nucor jumped into the steelmaking business with its first mini mill back in 1969, it brought changes with it. First, it eschewed the traditional blast furnace steelmaking method, opting instead for the newer, more efficient electric arc furnace technology that allowed it to run smaller batches and use scrap steel as a feedstock rather than iron ore. These methods helped the company build the nation's largest steel manufacturer and remains one of the most solidly profitable steel manufacturers in the business while so many others have either succumbed to bankruptcy or have been limping along for years with poor performance. 
Over the past few years, Nucor and the rest of the steel industry have been grappling with a massive oversupply of steel from China. In fact, a recent international trade organization ruling said that China and five other countries were dumping steel in the U.S. at less than cost. This glut of cheap steel had taken a toll on Nucor's results, and it has kept its stock standing still for the past eight years. 
However, things are starting to look much better for the steel industry. That ruling on illegal dumping means that those countries' imports into the U.S. carry large import tariffs that will boost the sales price for Nucor's steel. This has led to a recent run-up in its stock price, but this could be the beginning of something even more as the company will start to see improving profits in the coming months. 
You may not be buying shares of Nucor at the bottom of the cycle, but rest assured that the company will likely continue its 42-year streak of increasing dividends. Today's 2.75% dividend yield is also a pretty good consolation prize for not timing the market perfectly. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021



IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
Dividend stocks can be a valuable addition to your portfolio. By finding companies that return capital to investors on a regular basis, and reinvesting those dividends, you can generate compound returns that may outperform the broader market by a wide margin.

CTAS TOTAL RETURN PRICE DATA BY YCHARTS
If that investment method sounds appealing to you, here are three stocks that you should either have on your radar or add to your portfolio today.
Sometimes when you look at a business model that is simple, yet generates strong returns, you have to wonder why more companies don't try to jump in on the action. Cintas' (NASDAQ:CTAS) uniform and floor mat rental business is definitely one of those. While the company has some ancillary businesses, renting out and maintaining uniforms and floor mats generates the bulk of its revenue and profits. The rental and service aspect of that business model is key, because it establishes steady revenue streams, rather than the lumpiness that can come with  straight sales. 
What is even more impressive is that the company has been able to turn this rather simple concept into a steady, high-return business. Cintas has generated annual returns on equity in the high teens for more than 20 years, with the exception of the 2008-2010 recession -- and even then, its worst return was 7.5%. Those high rates of return have allowed the company to steadily raise its dividend for 33 years, and reduce its overall share count by close to a third over the past 10 years. (Note: That dip near the end of the dividend payment chart is because the company paid an additional special dividend in 2014 that had no bearing on its regular dividend).

CTAS RETURN ON EQUITY (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS
Cintas' current 1% dividend yield isn't anything that will turn your head, but that is in part because the company's stock is a little expensive now. So today may not be the most opportune time to buy this stock, but it's certainly worth putting on your radar for the future. 
For industrial manufacturers, there are always going to be times of feast and times of famine. These inevitable ups and downs can turn off some investors, but there are companies that do a better job of wading through the down times than others. One way is by building up a large order backlog that can keep your operations busy whether times are good or bad. Boeing (NYSE:BA), with $480 billion worth of orders for commercial planes alone, can assure investors that it won't be suffering from a lack of work any time soon.
That steady stream of orders on older and newer plane models gives the company some wiggle room when figuring out the kinks related to bringing a new aircraft to market. Sales of those new planes have led to some lumpy returns over the years, but the big takeaway here is that the company has mostly been able to maintain returns on capital employed in the the double digits for the past 20 years, which has allowed the company to increase dividends and reduce share count.

BA AVERAGE DILUTED SHARES OUTSTANDING (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS
Boeing's share price doesn't necessarily look cheap or expensive today. Its current enterprise value to EBITDA ratio of 9.4 times is pretty much in line with where the company has traded over the past decade. With a better than 3% dividend yield, though, they do have a certain amount of appeal.
In recent months, moderately recovering oil prices sent shares of oil and gas companies much higher compared to the lows that we saw at the beginning of the year. ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), a company that doesn't typically see huge gains over short periods, is up 20%. Some investors may feel that means they missed the boat on ExxonMobil. Looking a little deeper, though, it appears there could still be room to run for this energy industry stalwart.
The reason that it makes a compelling dividend investment in the first place is that it's probably the best in the business when it comes to allocating capital efficiently and generating returns through the ups and downs of the energy market. Even amid the recent drubbing of the energy market, ExxonMobil generated a return on equity in the high single digits, and that's the first time in over 25 years that it has fallen below 10%. With oil prices slowly creeping back up, you can pretty safely assume that ExxonMobil will see better returns ahead. 
Even though its stock has recovered a bit in recent months, it's still pretty cheap compared to its historical valuations. On a price to tangible book basis, Exxon's stock is trading at levels we haven't seen in more than 20 years. Plus, at about 3%, its dividend yield is in the highest neighborhood it has been in the 2000s.

XOM DIVIDEND YIELD (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS
Considering ExxonMobil's track record for generating returns over the long term, the stock looks somewhat attractively priced today. 



Before you consider The Boeing Company, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and The Boeing Company wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


