While crude oil bottomed out early last year below $30 a barrel and is now in the low $50s, the market isn't in recovery mode just yet. As a result, investors still have the chance to buy oil stocks at rock-bottom prices in hopes of scoring big gains when the cycle finally turns higher.
While that rising tide should lift the entire industry, we think ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), Marathon Oil (NYSE:MRO), and Encana (NYSE:OVV) offer some of the most compelling opportunities for upside. That's because all three can thrive at current prices, which makes them all the more likely to produce top-tier returns when crude turns higher. 
Tyler Crowe (ExxonMobil): Wall Street looks like it is losing patience with oil and gas producers as of late. When oil prices hit their low in January 2016 and started to recover from there, it would appear that many people thought the recovery would follow the path of most other recoveries and lead to steadily rising oil prices. That hasn't been the case this time because the cost of shale drilling in North America has declined so much. With the breakeven for most shale wells in the $50-a-barrel range and the ability to get a shale well producing in a matter of a few weeks, it has kept oil prices from rising steadily. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
For ExxonMobil, it has led to its stock price dropping back to incredibly low levels. Its price to tangible book value of 1.84 times isn't that far off the early 2016 low -- it should also be mentioned that prior to 2016, the last time ExxonMobil's stock was valued that low was before 1990. That valuation is in spite of the fact that per-share earnings are more than double what they were 18 months ago, and there is reason to believe things are going to get better from here. 
Perhaps shale will play such a pivotal role in the global oil market that we never see $100 a barrel again. What we have seen so far is that companies have learned to adjust to these lower price environments -- ExxonMobil's average breakeven price is less than $40 a barrel for most of its production. The company has a long history of generating superior returns, and its stock has such a low price to tangible book value and a dividend yield approaching 4%. Those elements suggest buying ExxonMobil today could be a great bet on the next phase of the oil industry. 
Sean O'Reilly (Marathon Oil): As one of the premier independent oil and gas producers in the U.S., with reserves of 2.1 billion barrels of oil equivalent, Marathon Oil is a fantastic energy stock to buy at the bottom of the cycle. Marathon has had a tough few years, along with practically every other E&P company, but has made some moves recently that have set it up for future success.
First, investors will be happy to hear that debt is no longer a concern for the foreseeable future. In July, the company issued $1 billion of senior notes with a 4.4% coupon and 2027 maturity. The proceeds were used to retire several higher-yielding bonds with maturities ranging from now through 2019. Not only does the company no longer have to worry about debt coming due anytime soon, but it will now also be saving about $60 million in interest per year. Investors looking for a way to play a rebound in the oil industry will also be interested to know that Marathon generated $555 million in free cash flow (FCF) over the 12 months ended June 30, 2017, more than enough cash to cover total dividends over the period of $170 million. With a respectable dividend yield of 1.68% and share trading for 80% of tangible book value (just where you want to be at the bottom of a cycle), Marathon Oil is an enticing pick for the bottom of the current oil cycle.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Matt DiLallo (Encana): Canadian shale driller Encana has undergone a dramatic transformation over the past few years. The company parted with several lower margin gas-focused assets and replaced them with high-growth, high-margin oil plays. As a result, the company is starting to turn the corner and is poised to deliver high-return growth as the oil market begins its long-awaited rebound.
Thanks to Encana's portfolio maneuverings, as well as a combination of efficiency gains and continued innovation, the company now has 11,000 future drilling locations that can earn it premium returns of 35% after tax at $50 oil. The company estimates that its high-return inventory will fuel 60% production growth and a 300% increase in its cash flow by 2021, while only burning through a fraction of those locations. Furthermore, the company can fuel that growth on just $50 oil, which is a $5-per-barrel improvement from when it initially unveiled its plan last year. That's one of the lowest breakeven levels in its peer group and positions the company to outperform its higher-cost rivals if crude goes nowhere.
Meanwhile, if oil prices recover further, Encana has the potential to accelerate its growth rate given its extensive inventory of low-cost wells. That suggests the stock could fuel big-time returns for shareholders who believe that the energy cycle is just about to make an upward turn.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Investing in a high-yield stock isn't worth it if the dividend winds up getting cut. The fat yield, in that case, was little more than an illusion. The energy industry has been plagued by this phenomenon in recent years, as exemplified by Kinder Morgan's 75% 2016 dividend cut or ENI's nearly 30% cut in 2015. But there are no magic tricks taking place at 6.4%-yielding Enterprise Products Partners L.P. (NYSE:EPD) or 3.8%-yielding ExxonMobil Corporation (NYSE:XOM). They are two of the safest high-yield dividends stocks in the energy space backed by long, and still intact, annual dividend growth streaks.    
Enterprise, an oil and natural gas midstream limited partnership, sports the higher yield of this pair. That's not surprising since the partnership structure is specifically designed to pass income through to unitholders. But it's worth noting that the 6.4% yield is backed by 20 consecutive years' worth of distribution increases, with an average annual increase of about 5%. So it has both an impressive yield and an impressive record of slow and steady distribution growth.  
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Enterprise is one of the largest and most diversified midstream players. It is continuing to invest for the future, with roughly $9 billion in growth investments in the works right now. That will help the partnership keep increasing the distribution in the years ahead. And Enterprise is conservatively run, with distribution coverage of 1.2 times providing a nice margin of safety for yield seekers.    
But one of the most exciting pieces of data here is that, even during the worst of the oil downturn that started in mid-2014, Enterprise's core distributable cash flow continued to head slowly higher. In other words, it was able to keep growing its largely fee-based business right through an energy industry rough patch while rewarding unitholders with distribution increases and solid distribution coverage of at least 1.2 times. If you're looking for a high and safe yield, you need to put Enterprise on your list -- even if you aren't focused on the energy patch.    
Another energy company you should be looking at for a safe high yield is integrated energy major ExxonMobil. The company has increased its dividend for an incredible 35 years despite operating in a commodity business prone to volatile price swings. The average annualized increase over the past decade was nearly 9%, around three times the historical rate of inflation growth.    
That said, it didn't sail through the recent oil downturn nearly as well as Enterprise. But that's actually one of the reasons to like Exxon more than its integrated energy peers, most of which have higher leverage ratios.

XOM FINANCIAL DEBT TO EQUITY (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS.
When oil prices started to collapse in mid-2014, Exxon's top and bottom lines took a big hit. But it continued to invest in its business and increase the dividend anyway. It did that by cutting costs and adding leverage to its balance sheet (cost-cutting and increasing debt was the basic tactic for all the energy majors). But here's the interesting thing: Despite long-term debt increasing from roughly $7 billion in 2013 to nearly $29 billion in 2016, Exxon is still one of the least-leveraged oil majors.    
Basically it , sed its strong balance sheet to power through the energy downturn, which is exactly what you want to see. The key, however, is that even after all that additional leverage, long-term debt still only makes up about 12% of the capital structure -- an industry-leading metric.    

EPD DIVIDEND YIELD (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS.
The improving energy market, meanwhile, has allowed Exxon to again cover its dividend and capital spending plans, and given it enough breathing room to pay down $4 billion in long-term debt through the first half of the year. There are integrated oil majors with higher yields, but none stacks up to Exxon's financial strength and dividend history.
You can find energy companies with yields higher than Enterprise or Exxon relatively easily. But the mix of dividend safety and high yield that each of these industry giants offers is a lot harder to come by. Both have proven their mettle and commitment to investors through long, uninterrupted streaks of annual dividend increases and their astute management through the recent, and deep, oil downturn. And with Enterprise and Exxon both offering relatively high yields today, these stocks could be prime portfolio candidates if you're looking for safe, high-yield dividend investments.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


