It's been a good-but-not-great year for Pepsi (NASDAQ:PEP) stock. Shares are up 24.3% so far this year, which sounds good until you realize that the overall S&P 500 has risen 26.3% in 2019 to date. Likewise, Pepsi's current dividend yield of 2.8% is good but not great.
If you're a smart investor, you're going to be looking for a top dividend stock rather than a mediocre one. So here's some great news: There are plenty of companies in the stock market with higher yields than Pepsi. Three to consider are ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), Kinder Morgan (NYSE:KMI), and Magellan Midstream Partners (NYSE:MMP).
Here's why these three are worth a look.
THESE TOP PICKS HAVE HIGHER DIVIDEND YIELDS THAN PEPSI. IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
In many ways, ExxonMobil hasn't changed a whole lot over the past few decades: Like its component companies Exxon and Mobil before it -- and their mutual predecessor Standard Oil before that -- the company discovers oil in the ground, pulls it out, refines it into gasoline, and sells it at its own branded filling stations. It also sells crude oil and natural gas to third parties.
Exxon also pays a dividend, which it has increased every year for the last 37 years, putting the company solidly in Dividend Aristocrat territory. The dividend yield has been creeping upwards for the last decade, and earlier this year hit a milestone: For the first time since the year 2000, Exxon's dividend yield surpassed the 5% mark. It's since receded to 4.9% but it's still much better than Pepsi's.
Pepsi's share price, though, has outperformed Exxon's over the past few years. The oil giant is in the midst of a multiyear turnaround plan to boost its slowly declining production. Exxon is using its strong balance sheet to increase its investment in new production during this low oil price environment. However, with such a high yield, shareholders who buy in now will be rewarded for their patience. 
As a Dividend Aristocrat, Exxon's reliability when it comes to its payout is beyond reproach. Thanks to its conservative management style, its balance sheet is also rock-solid. Unfortunately, the same can't be said for the largest natural gas pipeline operator in North America, Kinder Morgan.
In 2015, in response to rising levels of debt on its balance sheet and an oil and gas industry in turmoil thanks to the energy price downturn of 2014-2017, Kinder Morgan slashed its dividend by 75%, prompting a major stock sell-off.
Since then, Kinder has been working hard to get back into investors' good graces. The company has made progress on its balance sheet, trimming long-term debt by 14.7% over the last five years. It's also thrown dividend growth into overdrive, boosting its payout by 60% in 2018 and an additional 25% in 2019. Kinder plans another 25% hike for 2020, which would put its yield at about 6% -- more than twice Pepsi's and in line with other companies in the sector. 
Kinder Morgan's dividend history may not be as impressive as Exxon's, but for investors who like dividend growth, Kinder is a choice pick.
For investors hoping to have it all -- a conservatively managed company with a solid balance sheet and a yield that's more than double Pepsi's -- one company to consider is actually not a "company" in the traditional sense, but a master limited partnership (MLP): Magellan Midstream Partners.
Like Kinder Morgan, Magellan is primarily a pipeline operator, although it ships crude oil and refined products as opposed to natural gas. Unlike Kinder, the company has comparatively low debt in a sector where debt is common (thanks to the high up-front costs of building major infrastructure like pipelines and storage terminals). Like Exxon, Magellan has consistently upped its payout: 70 times since its 2001 IPO. Small wonder that the MLP currently sports a 6.5% yield. 
After some high-profile project cancellations in recent years, investors have been concerned that Magellan's list of expansion projects wasn't long enough to support substantial growth of its distribution (the MLP version of a dividend). However, a spate of recent additions have management convinced that it can still grow the distribution -- and the company overall -- while maintaining its solid balance sheet and coverage ratio. 
MLPs don't always play well with certain types of accounts -- especially retirement accounts -- and they have some increased reporting requirements come tax time, but Magellan's excellent yield and solid balance sheet make it a top choice for income investors. 
There's nothing wrong with having Pepsi in your portfolio, but its yield leaves something to be desired. However, a high dividend that gets cut can be worse than a middling dividend that doesn't. Luckily, ExxonMobil, Kinder Morgan, and Magellan look like good bets to offer both stability and yield to your dividend-focused portfolio. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


You might not usually think of the U.S. energy industry and the USMCA -- the proposed U.S.-Canada-Mexico trade deal that's been called "new NAFTA" and "NAFTA 2.0" -- at the same time.
Trade matters, though, to oil and gas producers. The U.S. is not only the world's leading producer of oil and gas, but it also became a net exporter of petroleum for the first time in September. It's now essentially tied with Saudi Arabia as the biggest oil exporter in the world. 
A lot of that oil and gas heads to Canada and Mexico. Fully 29.2% of exported petroleum and 75% of exported natural gas heads to one of our two neighbors. That makes the Canadian and Mexican markets vitally important for the five biggest U.S. oil producers  ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), Chevron (NYSE:CVX), EOG Resources (NYSE:EOG), ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP), and Occidental Petroleum (NYSE:OXY) and numerous smaller producers, too.
Here's how the USMCA deal is likely to affect them.
THE OIL AND GAS INDUSTRY DIDN'T FEATURE PROMINENTLY IN USMCA COVERAGE, BUT EXPORTS ARE A TOP CONCERN FOR U.S. PRODUCERS. IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The initial version of the USMCA was ratified in September 2018. However, negotiations between the White House and Congress have prompted some changes. Trouble is, a final version hasn't been released yet, so we have to rely on the September 2018 version, along with comments (or the lack thereof) made by various politicians about what was changed and what stayed the same.
What stayed the same was...just about everything, apparently. Republican Sen. Chuck Grassley notoriously said in 2018 that "95% of [the USMCA] is the same as NAFTA." With the recent changes, that may have -- maybe -- dropped to 90% or even 85%, but the bulk of the agreement is the same.
In particular, for ExxonMobil and its top oil-producing peers, that includes the 0% preferential tariff rate on oil and gas exports, as well as automatic export approval. This isn't unexpected, but it's a huge win for the industry, as tariffs would likely have jeopardized the U.S.'s newfound status as a leading energy exporter. 
One major change that appears to have been made to the final version of the USMCA involves the controversial "Chapter 11." No, not bankruptcy: NAFTA Chapter 11 dealt with disputes between a company located in one NAFTA country and the government of another NAFTA country. It provided for a way to resolve those disputes without going through the court system of the government in question.
The reason Chapter 11 came into existence was out of fear that a new government in one country could come into power and rewrite regulations or laws that would suddenly prohibit projects into which companies or investors in another country had already sunk a lot of money.
Well, Chapter 11 is now mostly gone, except for a handful of industries...one of which is oil and gas. That's right: U.S. oil and gas companies -- which had just been granted admittance to Mexico in 2013 for the first time since 1938 -- were worried that a potential new government in Mexico might try to renationalize the industry and boot them from the country again. So they lobbied hard to keep their Chapter 11 rights in the USMCA, and it looks like they prevailed. 
The last changes of any significance for Chevron and the other top U.S. producers are some tricky little regulations surrounding determining country of origin of oil and gas and their derivatives. 
Without getting too bogged down in the details, basically NAFTA put the burden on a product exporter to prove that the country of origin of its product was a NAFTA country, and provided limited ways to do so. USMCA instead puts the onus on the importer, and provides multiple new ways to go about making the determination. In particular, hydrocarbons transported by pipeline can now be qualified in most cases, which wasn't true before.
Because U.S. companies are more often exporters of oil than importers, the change is a net benefit for them.
While some industries, including the automotive industry, saw substantial changes between NAFTA and USMCA, and between the 2018 USMCA and the newest version, not a lot seems to have changed for the oil and gas industry. But the alterations that have happened look like unqualified wins for ConocoPhillips, EOG, Occidental Petroleum, Exxon, Chevron, and even the smaller U.S. oil producers. 
However, it's important to realize that the final version hasn't yet been ratified, and until that happens, there's always the chance something could go awry for the industry. For now, though, it looks like a Christmas present for U.S. oil and gas from our neighbors.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


