For retirees, passive income streams can ultimately make the difference between enjoying their later years in style and having to scramble to make ends meet. Dividend investing has become an important component in many retirement plans, and owning a portfolio of high-yield stocks can be a way to generate substantial cash for your non-working years that also affords a relatively high degree of financial flexibility.
Besides prioritizing stocks that offer sizable yields, it's also important to make sure that the companies in your portfolio are supported by underlying businesses that can keep dividends flowing for years to come. With those qualities in mind, retirees seeking dependable high-yield stocks should consider ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), PepsiCo (NASDAQ:PEP), and AT&T (NYSE:T) as foundation-level candidates for their income-generating portfolios. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
ExxonMobil boasts an eye-catching 5.2% dividend yield, and the company has consistently hiked its payout annually for the last 37 years. That's a stretch that has included substantial economic downturns and fluctuations for the price of crude oil, and the energy giant has demonstrated an ability to deliver payout growth even when the business is facing headwinds.
For retirees investing with a buy-to-hold outlook, near-term fluctuations in oil prices probably take a backseat in importance compared with payout size and reliability. Exxon has sat out of the market's rally over the last decade, with shares trading down roughly 6% across the period, but weak performance for the stock has helped make its returned-income profile even more appealing.
Supply glut pressuring oil prices and a dividend payout that's been more than doubled over the last 10 years have elevated the stock's yield to the neighborhood of a two-decade high, and the income component is supported by a business that still looks pretty sturdy. As fellow Motley Fool contributor Reuben Gregg Brewer has pointed out, the company has a strong balance sheet and a financial debt-to-equity ratio of just 0.15, and its diversified business spanning drilling, refining, and chemicals should allow it to weather industry volatility and keep cash flowing back to shareholders. 
Exxon also has some underappreciated growth opportunities, with big new drilling initiatives in the Permian Basin and off the coast of Guyana that are expected to substantially increase the oil giant's production capacity. These projects are admittedly capital intensive, and they haven't been getting much love from the market because of low oil prices, but the company's targets suggest that production from these sites will help push annual earnings in 2025 up 140% from their 2017 figure, assuming oil prices of $60 per barrel.
Oil stocks might not be popular right now, but Exxon is offering retirees a great dividend and a business with undervalued longevity at current prices.
PepsiCo's sturdy business and sterling dividend track record have long made the stock a favorite for retirement portfolios. The beverages side of the business has been in operation since 1898, the merger with Frito-Lay dates back to 1965 and has been a clear success, and the company has been delivering regular payout growth for nearly a half-century. 
Pepsi boasts a 47-year streak of annual dividend hikes, its shares yield a solid 2.8%, and the company's impressive stable of billion-dollar snack and beverage brands gives it pricing power and clout with retailers that should help support the dividend for decades to come.  The scale and distribution advantages mean that it's capable of supplying products around the globe more efficiently than most of the competition, and its snacks and beverages tend to get preferential placement in shops and grocery stores -- making it difficult for smaller competitors to capture market share. 
PepsiCo's snack business has provided insulation amid a downturn for domestic soda sales, and the company has been making smart acquisitions to further diversify its product lineup and better serve consumers looking for more health-conscious options. The North American beverages segment has actually recently been posting encouraging organic revenue growth, with sales expanding roughly 3% year over year last quarter thanks to strong performance from products like Gatorade, and there's still plenty of room for soda growth in international markets. Automation will likely create new supply chain efficiencies and be a long-term tailwind for the business, and an expanding global middle class should help spur demand for the company's products.
Retirees can feel confident that the company will continue returning substantial cash to shareholders and keep its fantastic dividend-growth streak alive.
AT&T has managed a 35-year run of annual dividend growth, its 5.5% dividend yield is the highest the investors can expect from a major American telecom, and shares still look like an appealing investment for retirees despite their impressive gains in 2019. 
The stock's roughly 35% rise on the year is certainly outside of recent norms, with the performance coming in substantially below that of the S&P 500 index across the last five- and 10-year periods even when dividends are included. However, shares still look reasonably priced trading at under 11 times this year's expected earnings -- particularly as management has recently reaffirmed the company's commitment to delivering modest payout growth even as it pays down debt and invests in new technologies.
AT&T's mobile wireless segment continues to look like a reliable cash machine, and it could return to a more pronounced growth phase thanks to the introduction of 5G network technology and subscription growth for devices including wearables and smart cars. Courtesy of the Time Warner acquisition, the company now owns a bevy of movie studios and franchises; television networks including HBO, Cartoon Network, and TNT; and a video game development wing that's put out some very successful content.
And even as the company's DIRECTV satellite television business has been seeing substantial subscriber erosion, the unit still generates billions in annual free cash flow that can be used to help support the dividend and cut down on debt. 



Before you consider AT&T Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and AT&T Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


With a $238 billion market cap, Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.B) is easily one of the world's largest integrated oil and natural gas companies. It has been working to increase its green credentials by investing in electricity assets and clean energy, but the vast majority of its portfolio is still in the oil & gas sector. And according to CEO Ben van Beurden, it's going to stay that way for a very long time. Here's what you need to know. 
Shell's history dates to the late 1800s, when it started transporting liquid fuels by sea. One of the first companies to do so, Shell quickly found that it was a far more profitable business than the import/export trade it was doing elsewhere in the company -- including the import of, yes, shells from the Far East. And thus, Shell, the energy company, was born.   
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
The company grew and expandens the entire energy sector, from the upstream (drilling for oil and natural gas) to the midstream (pipelines) to the downstream (refining and chemicals). These three businesses account for virtually all of the company's revenues. But carbon fuels are being displaced by cleaner alternatives, including solar and wind power. With more than a 100-year history behind it, Shell is used to shifting with the times. And today is no different, with the company slowly starting to dip its toe into the electricity space.
It isn't alone in this effort, with France's Total also making moves in the same direction. That said, Shell has been pretty clear that it wants to build its electricity-related business to the point where it stands toe to toe with its other energy investments. But the path to that goal isn't going to be quick, with the oil giant planning to invest only around $2 billion to $3 billion or so a year into the space. That may sound like a huge sum, but it's only about 10% of what the company normally spends on capital projects each year.   
So Shell sees the clean-energy writing on the wall, but why isn't it moving faster to adjust its portfolio? After all, if the world were to switch to clean energy right now, Shell would be left with worthless investments in oil and natural gas. The energy company's CEO recently sat down with Reuters and explained that his company has no choice but to keep investing in carbon-based fuels, saying, "Despite what a lot of activists say, it is entirely legitimate to invest in oil and gas because the world demands it."
That may sound at odds with what you see in the popular press, but it really isn't. The International Energy Agency (IEA) looks at the energy markets today and where they're likely to go in the future. This global energy watch group highlights that oil and natural gas make up roughly 50% of the global energy market today. That's a huge number, and one that can't change overnight because of the infrastructure built around it, notably including the vehicles -- cars, trucks, ships, and airplanes -- that carry people and products around the world today. Renewable-energy sources, by comparison, make up only 15% or so of global energy supply. 
Even in the future, oil and natural gas will remain very important. It's true that renewables will be the star of the show, growing quickly for decades into the future. But even if the world gets serious about reducing carbon emissions, the IEA projects that oil and natural gas will still be close to 50% of the energy mix in 2040. Coal, which is largely used to produce electricity, is going to see the greatest loss of share. That's the backdrop that led van Beurden to tell Reuters: "One of the bigger risks is not so much that we will become dinosaurs because we are still investing in oil and gas when there is no need for it anymore. A bigger risk is prematurely turning your back on oil and gas."  
Essentially, what he's saying is that oil and natural gas are still needed. It would be nice to simply drop them from the energy picture, but it can't be done overnight. It will take time to transition the world away from these vital energy sources.
That fact bumps up against another one: Oil and natural gas are depleting assets. Once you pull either out of the ground, it's gone for good. You have to find new sources if you want more of it. So as older oil and natural gas fields run dry, you risk a supply shortfall if you don't keep drilling. And that's why Shell continues to spend billions of dollars a year on its oil and gas businesses. 

RDS.B DATA BY YCHARTS
The numbers are huge, too, with Shell's total capital investment budget going as high as $32 billion a year through 2025. With only $2 billion to $3 billion or so going toward its small but growing electricity operations, that means Shell is putting around 90% of its cash to work in the oil and gas space. It's not alone. ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), for example, has decided to double down on oil and gas and is planning to spend as much as $35 billion a year to develop these energy businesses. Notably, Exxon is not building an electricity business -- though it is looking at other clean alternatives, such as using algae to produce biofuels -- so nearly all of that money is going to oil and natural gas.   
It would be wonderful if the entire globe got together and stopped using oil and natural gas. The truth is, over time, that might actually happen. But it won't happen quickly, because there's just too much infrastructure built around these vital energy sources. And just as important, it will take time to build out the clean power facilities that will be needed to replace oil and gas. For investors with a value bent, out-of-favor oil and gas companies like Shell and Exxon might actually be worth a deep dive.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


