ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) recently unveiled that it plans to record a historic writedown of up to $20 billion during the fourth quarter. The oil giant is making this move because it plans to throw in the towel on drilling for oil and natural gas in several regions due to low prices. With those areas offering unappealing investment returns, Exxon had no choice but to write down the value of the associated assets. 
The company's rip-the-bandage-off approach could spur others in the oil patch to do the same. Three oil stocks that our energy contributors believe might be next in line for a massive writedown are Chevron (NYSE:CVX), Occidental Petroleum (NYSE:OXY), and Diamondback Energy (NASDAQ:FANG). 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Reuben Gregg Brewer (Chevron): If you are looking at Exxon, you are almost certainly also examining U.S. peer Chevron. The two companies are in vastly different positions today. For starters, Chevron took an impairment charge of roughly $5 billion in the second quarter. So it has already looked at its portfolio and taken the hit that Exxon is just now announcing. But there's information in the size difference, as well. Exxon has long avoided write-offs, which effectively inflated the number. There's no reason to think that Chevron, which has been more proactive over time, needs to play catch up.   
Meanwhile, Chevron is just in a better position all around. For example, its capital spending needs were lower coming into 2020 because it was benefiting from past investments. Exxon, by contrast, needs to invest vast sums today to maintain its production. Which helps explain why Exxon's long-term debt load has increased by roughly 50% since the start of the year while Chevron's has only jumped by 30%. Debt-to-equity at Chevron sits at the low end of the industry at roughly 0.26 times versus Exxon's much higher 0.4 times or so. Exxon's write-off will make that number look worse, since it will reduce shareholder equity.  

XOM TOTAL LONG TERM DEBT (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS
At the end of the day, Exxon's write-off doesn't forewarn of trouble at Chevron. In fact, Chevron continues to operate from a position of relative strength, including the ability to ink an opportunistic acquisition. For conservative investors, Chevron and its 5.9% yield is really the more attractive choice between these two U.S. energy giants right now.
Matt DiLallo (Occidental Petroleum): U.S. oil giant Occidental Petroleum has already recorded several impairment charges this year due to the impact low oil prices are having on the value of its oil and gas assets. In the first quarter, the company booked $1.4 billion of goodwill impairment charges and equity investment losses due to its investment in MLP Western Midstream (NYSE:WES), which it acquired along with Anadarko Petroleum Last year. The company also took $580 million of impairment and related charges on its domestic and international oil and gas properties in that quarter. 
Occidental followed that up with a massive $6.6 billion writedown during the second quarter, including $5.2 billion for continuing oil and gas operations and another $1.4 billion for discontinued operations. Finally, it took another $2.4 billion writedown of its Western Midstream investment in the third quarter and $700 million of losses associated with the sale of its onshore assets in Colombia and its mineral and surface acreage in Wyoming, Colorado, and Utah. Add it all up, and the company has written off $10 billion of assets this year. 
Unfortunately, that might not be the end of the red ink. The company paid a gargantuan $55 billion for Anadarko in 2019, a whopping $5 billion above Chevron's rival bid. That price tag was at a significant premium when oil prices were around $60 a barrel. Today, crude is closer to $40, suggesting that Anadarko's assets aren't worth anywhere near what Occidental paid for them. That's evident in the disconnect between the company's total assets and its enterprise value: 

OXY ENTERPRISE VALUE DATA BY YCHARTS
This gap implies that the market sees the potential for Occidental to record additional writedowns of as much as $25 billion.
Daniel Foelber (Diamondback Energy): It's been a tough year on oil and gas prices, so it's no surprise that many oil producing assets are worth less than they were at the beginning of the year. A writedown, or impairment, is an accounting adjustment to asset values. A $5 change in the price of oil can be the difference between scraping by and losing money. And severe price changes can mean assets are worth a fraction of their previous value. The same logic goes toward the upside, where higher prices can make cheap assets valuable.
In the first quarter of 2020, The U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) tracked 40 publicly traded U.S. oil producers. The companies wrote down a collective $48 billion worth of assets, the highest quarterly adjustment since the third quarter of 2015. Writedowns can result in financial insolvency and potentially could lead some oil companies to bankruptcy.
In its second quarter, Diamondback Energy recorded a staggering $2.54 billion impairment charge related to lower commodity prices. It's worth noting that this doesn't mean the company had to pay $2.54 billion, it means that the value of its assets, and ultimately its company, is worth $2.54 billion less because it isn't as profitable when prices are lower.
Asset values are one thing, but what about the company's day-to-day performance? How much cash is it generating? Free cash flow can be a better indication of operational performance than net income. But unfortunately for Diamondback, it's been generating a lot of negative FCF for the past five years. In fact, only recently has it turned FCF positive.

FANG FREE CASH FLOW (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS
Management noted that it expects "to generate significant free cash flow in the second half of 2020 and in 2021 at current forward commodity prices." Capital expenditures are decreasing as well as the company wraps up some big infrastructure projects. This should allow Diamondback to generate the same or higher production while spending less money. 
This is a vulnerable time for Diamondback. The company has sustained a high level of spending for years with little cash to show for it. If commodity prices continue to recover, it looks well positioned to return to profitability and generate positive FCF. If they don't, then it wouldn't be surprising to see more writedowns from Diamondback in the coming years. Either way, the risks outweigh the reward and investors are better off steering clear of buying Diamondback Energy stock at this time.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Moderna (NASDAQ:MRNA), ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), and Teladoc Health (NYSE:TDOC) are among three of the best stocks to buy right now due to their potential to explode to the upside. There has never been a better time to get into the stock market. Even after a catastrophic market sell-off in March, the S&P 500 index has recouped all of its losses and is now up over 14% year to date. 
It isn't easy to find companies that can best this kind of performance. Today, let's look at why a coronavirus vaccine producer, an oil giant, and a premium telemedicine company all have the potential to make investors richer than what the market will reward. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Last month, Moderna disclosed that its experimental coronavirus vaccine mRNA-1273 is 94.1% effective at preventing COVID-19 infection and has 100% efficacy with regards to stopping severe cases of COVID-19 from developing. That is astonishingly good news, and is just about what we need to end the pandemic. Right now, the development-stage biotech is trading at record highs with its market capitalization hovering around $60 billion. However, there is plenty of room for shares to run even higher.
Moreover, the candidate achieved such efficacy without compromising safety. To date, there have been no serious adverse events reported in its phase 3 efficacy trials. Long-term safety data coming from phase 1 and phase 2 participants have also been very favorable. 
Moderna has signed deals with countries across the developed world to provide over 330 million doses of mRNA-1273. The candidate is currently awaiting an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). A meeting to review its safety and efficacy is scheduled for Dec. 17.
Next year, Moderna expects to produce between 500 million to 1 billion doses of mRNA-1273, which could translate to tens of billions in potential revenue. More critically, its success in developing a coronavirus vaccine candidate serves to validate the concept behind all of its messenger RNA (mRNA) programs. The company has over 20 candidates in development and could generate billions more in revenue on top of what mRNA-1273 has to offer.
The company currently has over $4 billion in cash on its balance sheet and no debt whatsoever. Due to the magnitude of the coronavirus market opportunity, Moderna is arguably one of the best biotech stocks to choose from. Shares are up by over 680% year to date, including a 113% gain in November alone.
Fortune has not been kind to ExxonMobil stock for much of 2020. Year to date, its stock has lost nearly 40% of its value as the COVID-19 pandemic shut down the global economy and sent oil prices around the world into a free fall. 
In response, the company had to lay off close to 15% of its workforce and cut $6 billion in capital expenditures. For investors who want to buy the dip, however, now is the optimal time to do so.  
ExxonMobil's stock opportunity lies not in its past financials or events but in the eventual finale to the pandemic. There are now multiple coronavirus vaccine candidates that have achieved success in phase 3, including the aforementioned mRNA-1273. Once vaccination becomes widespread, there will undoubtedly be an unprecedented surge in demand for oil as travel across the world returns to normal. 
Back in 2019, the company recognized $8.65 billion in profits in the first nine months of operations compared to a $2.37 billion loss in the same period this year. That $11 billion differential in net income could all be recovered in a very short period of time next year as coronavirus vaccines roll out. ExxonMobil stock now offers a dividend yield of over 8% per year as an icing on the cake, in addition to its rebound potential. 
Teladoc could easily be the top healthcare stock to invest in at the moment due to its undervalued future expansion potential. In October, the company completed its multi-billion dollar acquisition of Livongo Health, allowing it to offer digital diabetes and chronic disease management solutions to its member base. Teladoc estimates that at least 17 million out of its 70 million members are eligible for Livongo's services.
This gives the two companies a big edge in expanding into the estimated $121 billion telemedicine market in the U.S. alone. On top of that, Teladoc can also recognize significant cost efficiencies via integrating the two platforms and scaling Livongo's product to over 175 countries that Teladoc operates in. The company expects the acquisition will save $60 million within two years and generate over $500 million in revenue synergies by 2025. In 2020, Teladoc projects it will generate close to $1 billion in revenue ($1.34 billion together with Livongo), representing a massive increase over the $553 million it brought in 2019. 
Aside from seeing a physician from the comfort of one's own home, there are also significant perks for healthcare professionals to go digital. For example, doctors can use Teladoc's interface to seamlessly navigate a patient's medical history, analyze real-time biometrics, and take account of treatment suggestions based on the platform's algorithm-driven recommendations. As for investors, it should be no surprise that this revolutionary stock is up a whopping 157% over the past 12 months. Together with Moderna and ExxonMobil, Teladoc is a stock you will not want to miss out on.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


