It's easy to see why Warren Buffett, the founder and CEO of Berkshire Hathaway (NYSE:BRK.A) (NYSE:BRK.B), is one of the most admired investors in the world. He's made early investors in Berkshire millionaires thanks to his investing and business prowess, and his homespun aphorisms have taught many of us key lessons about investing and money management. 
Though he's one of the richest people in the world, he still lives in a modest house in Nebraska and continues to work every day even as he approaches age 90.
Buffett fans probably already have a sense of what kind of stocks the Oracle of Omaha like, but you may not have thought of these three. Keep reading to see why our contributors recommend ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), Comcast (NASDAQ:CMCSA), and SodaStream International (NASDAQ:SODA).
IMAGE SOURCE: THE MOTLEY FOOL.
John Bromels (ExxonMobil): Buffett famously said, "It's better to invest in a wonderful company at a fair price than a fair company at a wonderful price." And ExxonMobil's price is looking more than fair right now, thanks to some questions about the company's oil production capacity.
For several quarters now, Exxon's upstream oil production has been falling. That's in large part because conservative Exxon didn't spend much money on new exploration during the oil price downturn of 2014 to 2017, and now older wells are drying up faster than the company can bring new production capacity online.
Thanks to the current high price of oil, though, Exxon is still making money -- and lots of it -- with net income up 16% year over year in its most recent quarter. And the company has begun working in earnest to start bringing production online. In particular, it's making swift progress in getting its promising offshore Liza oilfield in Guyana online. But even with an accelerated timeline, production isn't expected to begin until 2020. 
However, that makes this a good time to invest like Buffett: Not only can you pick up shares at a bargain price, but you can avail yourself of the company's current 3.8% dividend yield while you wait for Exxon's production numbers to improve. After all, if you're investing like Buffett, you're keeping an eye on the long term, and Exxon is looking like a solid long-term investment at these prices.
Rich Smith (Comcast): What does Warren Buffett look for in a stock? Once again, here's a quote from Roger Lowenstein's biography, Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist, to keep us focused on the ideal investment:
As they rocked on the Russells' front-porch glider in the stillness of the Midwestern twilight, the parade of Nashes and Studebakers and the clanging of the trolley car would put a thought in Warren's mind. ... "All that traffic," he would say to her. "What a shame you aren't making money from the people going by." As if the Russells could set up a toll booth on North 52nd Street. "What a shame, Mrs. Russell."
Buffett loves to own stocks that make money from doing actually very little -- just collecting money from people as they're passing by. And isn't that the very definition of Comcast's business model?
People these days love to talk about "cutting the cord" and ditching cable TV in favor of streaming online. On the surface, this trend sounds like bad news for Comcast. But how do you get online in the first place? Usually, by paying an internet service provider like Comcast to give you access to the internet. Comcast owns the "pipes," and you have to pay a toll to use them.
For all of the worrying about Comcast's future in the age of cord-cutting, this company is doing just fine, recording profits of $22.7 billion over the last year. At a trailing P/E ratio of just 6.5, Comcast is priced like a business that's going out of business. But it's really a toll booth business -- and business is booming.
Jeremy Bowman (SodaStream): Coca-Cola has long been one of Buffett's favorite stocks. Not only does he love the company's products, but he loves big brands like Coke, which, along with its distribution network and marketing muscle, give it an economic moat. But there's another smaller beverage company that may interest Buffett and his acolytes: SodaStream, the maker of countertop DIY soda machines.
SodaStream is by far the biggest player in its niche at-home soda-making market, dispatching competitors like Primo Water and Cuisinart, as the stock has skyrocketed since the company pivoted away from soda to a sparkling water brand. Over the last three years, the stock has jumped more than 300%.
However, there's good reason to believe the stock could bubble higher. Revenue surged 24% in its most recent quarter, growing in its three largest regions, and SodaStream continues build operating leverage as it gets bigger. That means profits are growing faster than revenue, something investors like Buffett see as a key sign of a sustainable competitive advantage. SodaStream's razor-blade model also gives it a moat as customers are locked into the system once they buy a starter kit, and purchases of consumables like CO2 refills and flavors generate higher margins for the company.
Finally, analysts have consistently underestimated the stock as it surged past estimates in nearly every report in the last three years. Considering its growth prospects, the stock looks very reasonable at a P/E ratio of 27.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Sometimes the markets move in mysterious ways. One great example of this is the oil and gas market right now. Even though we have seen oil prices rise significantly over the past year or so, and they currently hover around $75 per barrel for Brent crude oil, the prices of many companies in this industry are still trading as though oil is $20 less than that. 
So we asked three of our investing contributors to each highlight a company they think has a compelling investment case right now in the oil and gas industry. Here's why they selected Devon Energy (NYSE:DVN), Range Resources (NYSE:RRC), and ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM).
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Matt DiLallo (Devon Energy): Oil producer Devon Energy hasn't benefited from the uptick in oil prices this year. Overall, shares of the exploration and production (E&P) company have only increased about 2%, which has vastly underperformed the price of oil -- up 7% this year -- and the average E&P stock -- up nearly 14% as measured by the iShares US Oil and Gas E&P EFT. Because of that underperformance, Devon's stock trades at a bottom-of-the-barrel valuation compared to its peers.
Devon is working to address that valuation disconnect by selling non-core assets and using the proceeds to repurchase shares. Earlier in the year, the company announced a $1 billion buyback program, which it recently boosted to $4 billion after agreeing to sell its midstream business. That repurchase program has the potential to retire 20% of Devon's outstanding stock at the current share price.
That buyback could drive shares meaningfully higher in the coming year given what similar programs have done for rival E&P's. Last fall, for example, Anadarko Petroleum unveiled a $2.5 billion share repurchase program, which at the time was enough to buy back 10% of its outstanding shares. It has since increased its authorization by $500 million and is on pace to repurchase that entire amount by the end of the current quarter. This program has helped drive Anadarko's stock up nearly 60% since last fall -- vastly outperforming Devon Energy -- while the buybacks of other oil producers have also fueled big-time outperformance over the past year. Devon's buyback could prove to be a similar catalyst, making it one of the top oil stocks to buy this month in my opinion.
Tyler Crowe (Range Resources): I'm typically loathed to recommend a company that is focused solely on exploration and production (Note from Matt: He is.). That is especially true of natural gas producers because the natural gas market is so constrained by the ability to move product to places outside the U.S. Even under these less than favorable market conditions, a stock can stick out as incredibly cheap. One stock that sticks out to me right now is Range Resources.
Range's natural gas assets sit on some of the most prime acreage in the Marcellus shale gas formation. The economics of its wells are so good that even at today's benchmark prices of $2.89 per thousand cubic feet, the company is able to generate a decent rate of return. Today, the company's cash costs are around $2.00 per mcf, and that is with high transportation costs because of a lack of takeaway capacity in the region.
Range is by no means perfect. The company's debt profile is a little high for comfort, and the company hasn't had the best reputation of living within its cash flow. However, there are a couple catalysts in the works that should help correct this. One is that Range is looking to sell its non-core acreage in Northern Louisiana that could be incredibly attractive for someone looking to export gas via LNG. The other is new pipelines in the Marcellus region which, according to Range, will reduce its cash costs by another $0.25 per mcf. It also helps that management is saying the right things about growing production within its cash flow. These three things should drastically improve returns and reduce its debt load.
As it stands today, Range trades at less than its tangible book value. Range's prospects will wax and wane with the price of gas, but the plan management has in place should make it able to handle incredibly low gas prices and generate solid returns as pipeline access opens up.

DVN DATA BY YCHARTS.
Reuben Gregg Brewer (ExxonMobil Corporation): Exxon's stock is down around 2% so far this year, while many of its peers are up 10% or more on a relatively strong oil market. Some of the key reasons for Exxon's lagging performance are falling production numbers and a return on capital employed ratio that has fallen in line with the pack after years of above average results. It's been hard to love Exxon lately, but don't get too caught up on these short-term issues.
Exxon has a number of large capital projects in the works that should get production growing again, including offshore drilling in Guyana and Brazil, liquefied natural gas in Mozambique, and production growth plans onshore in the United States. Meanwhile, management plans to take a leading role operating more of its major projects, an area of expertise for the company, which it believes will help push return on capital employed from the current single digit level up into the mid-teens.   

XOM DIVIDEND YIELD (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS.
The problem is that it's going to take time to shift gears at this $340 billion market cap oil giant. But that's opened up an opportunity for conservative, long-term investors. The price drop being driven by investors thinking short term has pushed the yield up to roughly 4%, the high end of the stock's historical range. And its price to tangible book value is lower than it has been since the late 1980s. If you have faith that Exxon can return to its industry-leading ways, now is a good time to jump aboard.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


