The energy industry is in the doldrums, and there's no way to sugarcoat it. On top of that it has to deal with a negative environmental image. Put simply, ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), the one energy company I own, and its peers are getting hit from every direction. I think Exxon can survive these tough times, but that doesn't mean investors should ignore the facts. Here's a quick reality check and why I think Exxon can get to the other side of this tough stretch in one piece.
Looking at the very big picture, global warming is definitely taking center stage today. Those with an ESG focus might prefer to see Exxon and its peers go out of business, which many environmentalists would cheer as well. That isn't in the cards today, since carbon-based fuels remain vital and entrenched energy sources, but the bias against energy stocks is a headwind they have to face on Wall Street. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Digging in a little deeper, toward the end of 2019 Exxon CEO Darren Woods pointed out just how widespread the problem is in the energy space. On the upstream side of the equation (energy drilling), the prices of oil and natural gas both remain toward the low end of their 10-year ranges. These are commodities, so Exxon can't do anything about prices. And since drilling is Exxon's largest business, weak pricing is tough. 
Normally, low oil and natural gas prices would be offset by the company's downstream operations (chemicals and refining). The logic is simple: Oil and gas are key inputs on this side of the business, so cheap prices should be a net benefit to these operations. Only margins in Exxon's chemicals and refining businesses are near the bottom of their 10-year ranges, too. So what would usually be a positive in a tough oil price environment is today also a negative.  
Adding to the bad news is that Exxon's production has been falling for a few years. To fix that, Exxon is spending heavily on exploration (upgrades to its downstream operations are also part of the spending), with as much as $35 billion a year earmarked for capital investment through 2025. Weak financial results due to troubling market conditions, however, mean that Exxon is going to need to lean heavily on its balance sheet to get through the next few years. Investors are not pleased. 
At this point, there's not a lot going that's likely to change this scenario for the better. For example, energy prices are likely to linger at around current levels because of the supply-and-demand dynamics in the market. On the supply side, U.S. energy production has exploded in recent years, upending the historical equilibrium in the space. Fracking tends to ramp up quickly when prices rise, keeping a lid on the price of oil. 
Natural gas, meanwhile, ends up being a byproduct of increasing shale oil drilling. So even if natural gas-specific drilling efforts are curtailed (reducing supply), gas production is likely to remain relatively high and continue to be a headwind to this fuel. Exxon's efforts to increase its own production are good for the company in many ways, but they will help hamper energy prices. 
That said, it is positive (perhaps a mixed blessing) to see that Exxon appears to have turned a corner productionwise, with key metrics here turning higher throughout most of 2019. The bigger benefit, however, is that Exxon is working to improve its portfolio of assets so it has more profitable operations -- replacing expensive-to-produce oil with less expensive new production. 
And, as its capital investment activities turn into operating production assets, its return on capital employed (effectively a measure of how well it uses shareholder capital) should start to pick up. Falling ROCE has been yet another headwind hampering Exxon's shares. Essentially, Exxon is trying to control the things it can in a tough pricing environment so it can come out the other side of this oil downturn a stronger company.

XOM FINANCIAL DEBT TO EQUITY (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS
However, equally important in this environment is that the oil major is working off of a strong foundation. Specifically, Exxon's financial debt-to-equity ratio is roughly 0.15, giving it a rock-solid balance sheet. It could double its debt load and still be within the same range as most of its peers. In addition, it is selling lesser-quality assets to help offset the spending. That improves its portfolio and helps reduce its need to issue debt. Yes, leverage is going to increase over the next few years, but Exxon's balance sheet can handle it, and management is doing what it can to soften the blow.
Exxon's 5% yield is near 20-year highs. Its price to tangible net worth is near 30-year lows. The oil giant appears to be on sale, which should interest dividend-focused investors and those with a value bent. That, however, is the good news. The bad news is that Exxon is in the Wall Street doghouse for very good reasons, and there's not a whole lot on the horizon today that appears likely to change that. 
I'm willing to hold through this storm, reinvesting my dividends, in the belief that the supply/demand imbalances in the energy space will correct themselves over time. And when that happens, based on what Exxon is doing today, it will be well positioned to prosper. However, I would be fooling myself if I believed that all was well here. This oil giant is still muddling through a rough patch, and that will remain true for the foreseeable future unless something material changes in the energy sector. My bet is that it can handle the strain.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Well-chosen dividend stocks can provide you with a reliable and steadily growing source of income -- one that could help to fund your living expenses in retirement.
The key is to find companies with strong competitive advantages and a commitment to growing their cash payouts to shareholders -- companies like the ones below.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
By several measures, Verizon Communications (NYSE:VZ) has built the best wireless network in the U.S. It's an industry where scale matters, and the more than $125 billion that the telecom titan has invested in its network since 2000 places it in a powerful competitive position. 
Verizon's more than 100 million subscribers  help it generate strong and predictable cash flow. During the first three quarters of 2019, Verizon produced $26.7 billion in operating cash flow, which, in turn, allowed it to return $7.5 billion to investors via dividends. Verizon has increased its cash payout for 13 consecutive years, and its shares currently yield a hefty 4.1%. 
Although its FiOS business is shedding some customers due to cord-cutting, new 5G technology -- and the faster wireless speeds it allows -- is presenting Verizon with a powerful growth opportunity. The technology will also allow Verizon to deliver internet service wirelessly into people's homes that's on par with or faster than existing cable internet connections. Additionally, 5G will help to advance other cutting-edge technologies, such as virtual reality, self-driving vehicles, and the Internet of Things. Together, these markets should fuel demand for Verizon's new 5G services, and, by extension, further dividend increases for shareholders.
ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) is another dividend stock that can help to fund your retirement. The oil and natural gas giant has increased its cash payout by an average annual rate of 6.2% over the last 37 years. Its shares currently yield a sizable 5.1%.
Fears of electric vehicles reducing demand for gasoline have weighed on Exxon's shares in recent years, but even if this vision of the future does come to fruition, it's still many years away. For its part, Exxon estimates that an additional new supply of as much as 550 billion barrels of oil will be needed by 2040.  To help meet this demand, Exxon expects to increase its production to approximately 5 million oil-equivalent barrels per day by 2025. Management believes doing so will allow the company to double its profits, without an increase in oil prices.  And if ExxonMobil can reach these growth targets, investors who buy shares today should be well-rewarded.
Like ExxonMobil, investors have questioned Coca-Cola's (NYSE:KO) long-term viability in a world in which consumers are moving away from sugary drinks. But Coca-Cola is far more than a soda company, and many investors are underestimating its growth potential.
Coca-Cola's vast global distribution system allows it to bring new beverages to market at a scale that few other companies can rival. The beverage behemoth has expanded beyond soda into healthier drinks such as bottled water, nutrient-enhanced water, juices, and teas, with popular brands such as Dasani, Smartwater, Simply, and Honest Tea. It's also making a big push into the massive global coffee market with its $5 billion acquisition of Costa Coffee.
Coca-Cola's ability to enter new markets and adapt to changing consumer preferences should allow it to continue to drive its sales and profits higher. Its shares currently yield 2.8%, and with 57 straight years of annual dividend increases, you can expect Coca-Cola to continue to grow its cash payout to shareholders for many years to come.



Before you consider The Coca-Cola Company, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and The Coca-Cola Company wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


