
THE IDEAL RETIREMENT STOCKS WILL MAKE YOU MONEY, WHILE ALSO ALLOWING YOU TO RELAX. SOURCE: FLICKR USER OLAF GRADIN
When investing for retirement, the last thing you want to worry about is what your stocks are doing on a daily basis. The ideal retirement stock provides steady, predictable earnings growth, a dividend that increases significantly, and relative immunity to recessions and other adverse economic conditions.
Fortunately, many stocks fit that description. Here are three of the best stocks that can help you build the retirement of your dreams without causing you unnecessary stress.
When the going gets tough, consumers go here
In the retail sector; not many companies perform well during a recession or other tough economic times. One exception is Wal-Mart (NYSE:WMT).
Wal-Mart's scale and low-frills approach allows the company to undercut pretty much all of its competitors -- even online retailers like Amazon.com in many cases. Because of this, along with Wal-Mart's "one-stop shop" business model, the company does well in any economic environment.
When the economy is doing well, Wal-Mart's loyal customer base has more money to spend. In bad times, even though consumers have less money to spend, Wal-Mart attracts more shoppers, which more than makes up for it. Consumers who generally shop at higher-end retailers tend to look for bargains when they need to tighten their belts, and Wal-Mart is certainly a great place to find bargains.
To emphasize this point, consider how well Wal-Mart performed during the 2008 crash. While other retailers' profits plunged, Wal-Mart actually earned more money and performed even better than it did before the crash.

Simply put, Wal-Mart can thrive no matter what the economy is doing. As the company continues to grow and evolve, its competitive advantages will only improve.
The ability to capitalize on tough times
One characteristic to look for in stocks you don't want to baby-sit is a company's ability to come out of bad times stronger than it went in. One company with that capacity is ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM).
For starters, as the largest publicly traded integrated oil company, ExxonMobil has exposure to all aspects of the petroleum business. That means even when certain businesses are losing money when oil prices are down (such as exploration and production), others actually do better (such as Exxon's refining and chemicals business). Plus, its size gives it a competitive advantage over its rivals, because it can run more efficiently and use economies of scale to its advantage.
Also, during tough times, the strongest companies capitalize on the opportunity to buy smaller (and weaker) rivals at a discount. For example, the acquisition of Wachovia during the financial crisis left Wells Fargo even better off now than it was before. ExxonMobil has the same potential when oil prices crash (like they recently did).
The company can borrow as much money as it wants to very cheaply, since it is one of just three companies in the U.S. with a top-notch AAA credit rating (not even the U.S. government has credit as good as ExxonMobil). In fact, it just used its superb credit to raise $8 billion, which it could employ to acquire other companies.
Possibly the best retirement stock there is
As I said in another recent article, there is simply no better all-around stock in the market than Berkshire Hathaway (NYSE:BRK.A) (NYSE:BRK.B).
The company's general business model is pretty simple. Berkshire's primary business is insurance, which it conducts through subsidiary companies such as GEICO, and it uses the insurance premiums it collects to finance acquisitions and other investments. Over the years, Berkshire has built up an impressive portfolio of fully owned companies, including Fruit of the Loom, NetJets, Dairy Queen, and The Pampered Chef.
In addition, the company has a stock portfolio that most retirement investors would love to get a piece of. Berkshire owns shares of about 50 solid companies, including large stakes in American Express, Coca-Cola, and Wells Fargo.
Finally, perhaps the best reason you don't have to worry about Berkshire is its extremely shareholder-oriented management team, led by Warren Buffett himself. And don't stress too much about the fact that Buffett won't be at the helm forever. He's leaving shareholders with some of the best managers and stock pickers in the business, and is putting safeguards in place to assure the company's interests are protected.
How to find your own
Of course, the stocks in this article aren't the only ones that make excellent retirement investments. Plus, three stocks are not nearly enough for a properly diversified portfolio, no matter how safe the individual companies are.
However, the basic principles that apply to these choices can be applied to your search for other great retirement stocks. Just ask yourself the same questions, such as "what happens to this company's earnings during a recession" and "is there any reason to think the dividend and earnings won't keep growing", and you'll be able to construct a well-rounded portfolio of retirement stocks that lets you sleep well at night.



Before you consider Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


With the stock market still close to record highs, many stocks are starting to seem expensive. However, there are always good deals to be found, so we asked three of our analysts to tell us about stocks that could be great buying opportunities right now. Here are their picks:
Dan Caplinger: Energy stocks have taken huge hits lately, and even Dow component and blue-chip stalwart ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) has felt the pinch of crude oil prices, which have fallen by more than half in less than a year. But as typically happens, short-term-focused traders have sent Exxon's share price down much further than the true change in its long-term prospects would warrant.
ExxonMobil will inevitably see massive drops in revenue and earnings in 2015 as the oil giant adjusts to the reality of lower prices for oil and natural gas. But as an integrated oil company, Exxon also has some offsetting benefits from low oil prices, as its refinery and marketing operations tend to see their profits rise when oil gets cheaper. Moreover, Exxon's midstream network of pipelines and storage facilities should remain in high demand, giving it a competitive advantage over independent producers that don't have the flexibility of storing crude until market conditions improve.
A few energy analysts believe that crude oil's drop might never reverse itself as the world weans itself off fossil fuels. Yet most analysts believe that the shift away from fossil fuels will take decades to play out, making oil and gas production an important source of energy well into the future. Buying Exxon shares now has a good chance of paying off even without a return to former record highs for oil, and the possibility of higher crude prices is just icing on the cake for bullish investors.
Matt Frankel: One cheap stock that is a long-term winner is American Express (NYSE:AXP), which has fallen by more than 13% so far in 2015.

There have been a few factors contributing to American Express' fall. For starters, the company recently lost its exclusivity agreement with Costco. The market's negative reaction to this is certainly understandable. After all, 8% of Amex's credit card spending takes place on Costco-branded credit cards. Around the same time, the company also lost its co-branding partnership with JetBlue.
Then, American Express lost a legal battle, and is no longer allowed to prohibit retailers from encouraging customers to use other types of cards (such as Visa or MasterCard).
CEO Ken Chenault admitted that these developments will hurt American Express' revenue over the next couple of years. However, he also said the company should still be able to achieve its goal of 12-15% annual EPS growth over the "moderate to long term", which (if accurate) makes Amex's P/E of 14.5 times TTM earnings seem downright cheap.
In a nutshell, American Express is the best at what it does, with or without any individual partnership. The company creates exclusive "clubs" of cardholders that attract an affluent consumer base. As a result, American Express can charge merchants higher swipe fees than its competitors can, and can command higher annual fees from its cardholders.
American Express is cheap because of temporary setbacks, so now could be a great time to get in.
Jordan Wathen: Slowly but surely Capital One (NYSE:COF) has grown from its roots as a credit card company to a true bank, gathering deposits by acquisition of ING Direct online and North Fork Bancorporation in New England. Today, it has a healthy balance sheet, and while credit cards are still at the forefront, it has diversified into consumer lending (mostly auto loans) and commercial banking for businesses.
Its growth is starting to pay dividends. It deferred dividend hikes and share repurchases during the acquisitive years coming out of the 2008 financial crisis. But with cash building, the company is dedicating more to its payouts to shareholders.
In 2015, the bank hopes to put $4 billion back in shareholders' hands -- $3.125 billion in repurchases and the remainder in dividends. With the dividend set to grow to $0.40 per share per quarter, it will eclipse its pre-recession high water mark of $0.375 per quarter. Falling unemployment and low energy prices should be good for its loan book, which is most concentrated in loans to consumers.
At about two times tangible book value, and 11 times earnings, investors are letting Capital One trade inexpensively. After all, this is a company that has consistently earned more than 15% on its tangible equity over its history, a compounding machine that should reward investors who buy and hold for the long haul.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


