Warmer weather is (finally!) showing up around the country, and the energy markets seem to be warming up as well, with oil prices hitting their highest levels all year and domestic production of oil and gas continuing to increase. That makes now a great time to look into energy stocks. 
We asked three of our Motley Fool contributors what their top picks are in the energy industry right now. They came back with Kinder Morgan (NYSE:KMI), ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), and Magellan Midstream Partners (NYSE:MMP). Here's why they think these are particularly good buys right now. 
GROWTH MAY BE IN THE PIPELINE FOR THESE THREE TOP OIL AND GAS INDUSTRY STOCKS. IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
John Bromels (Kinder Morgan): All the things I love about natural gas pipeline operator Kinder Morgan (and one thing I can't stand) were on display in its recent first-quarter 2019 earnings report, and that makes it my top energy stock to buy right now. 
First, the good things: Kinder Morgan continued to execute well, fulfilling its promises to make money, return cash to shareholders, and reduce debt. Distributable cash flow was up 10% over the year-ago quarter, to $1.4 billion, slightly exceeding the company's outlook. It upped its quarterly dividend by 25% -- as promised -- to $0.25 per share. It also used cash from the sale of its Canadian Trans Mountain pipeline to pay down $1.3 billion of debt. All of this was in line with or slightly ahead of expectations.
And then the thing I can't stand happened: Despite hitting these marks, the stock price tumbled anyway, dipping below $19.50 a share. This isn't entirely surprising as the market has been skeptical of the company since it slashed its dividend in 2015, and has been slow to acknowledge the positive changes Kinder Morgan has made since. 
While the price drop isn't good news for those of us who already own Kinder Morgan, it represents an opportunity for those looking to buy into this well-run pipeline company. 
Rich Smith (ExxonMobil): Four months ago, I picked ExxonMobil as my top energy stock to buy right ... then, in November -- and the more the calendar changes, the more the arguments for buying ExxonMobil stock stay the same.
When that article ran on Nov. 9, a barrel of WTI crude oil was selling for $60.19. Today, that same barrel of black gold can be had for $60.18. Similarly, ExxonMobil's stock price, which, sitting at $81.32 as I pen these words, is within mere pennies of what the stock cost back then. All of this has me thinking: If ExxonMobil looked like a buy back in November, shouldn't it still be a buy today?
After all, if anything's changed in the investment case for Exxon, it's that the momentum of the oil market has improved. In the middle of a steep decline back in November, oil prices have now been on a tear, rising 42% from their $42.53 nadir hit on Christmas Day. (That's good news for a company that sells oil.)
Little wonder that analysts remain optimistic about the prospects for Exxon, as they are forecasting nearly 19% annualized profit growth over the next five years for this 16.5 P/E stock. That's cheap, even before you factor in the 4.1% dividend yield. And Exxon's quality of earnings has rarely been higher, with free cash flow backing up nearly 80% of reported earnings.
As much as I liked Exxon then, I still like it today.
Tyler Crowe (Magellan Midstream Partners): A business like moving oil and gas around in pipelines isn't one that grows at eye-popping rates, but it's an industry with lots of growth potential over the next few years as North America continues to grow production from shale. This production surge is opening up growth avenues that few ever thought possible such as a booming petrochemical industry and crude oil export capacity. 
For those looking to ride this large but slow-moving wave, Magellan Midstream Partners is one worth looking at. For one, the company has a stellar record of steadily growing investor payouts through the ups and downs of the oil and gas industry without compromising its balance sheet. At the end of the most recent quarter, the company had raised its payout for the 67th consecutive time while maintaining the lowest debt leverage (as measured by debt to EBITDA) in the midstream industry.

MMP FINANCIAL DEBT TO EBITDA (TTM). DATA BY YCHARTS.
Magellan's plans to grow its payout won't blow anyone's socks off -- management anticipates a 5% increase in 2019 -- but that's because it intends to spend $1.25 billion to complete construction of its current projects. In 2019 alone, it expects to spend $1.1 billion, which is 40% more than it has spent in any year prior. For now, management is electing to plow more into growth today for higher distribution growth down the road. For investors looking for a high-yield stock they can hold for a long time, Magellan should be high on the list. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Finding high-yield dividend stocks often requires investors to look at companies that are out of favor for some reason. The key is to avoid the ones facing insurmountable troubles, and instead focus on those where the problems appear likely to be temporary. ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and VEREIT (NYSE:VER) are great examples of the latter. What's most exciting about both, however, is that each appears to be effectively working through its headwinds. That makes this a good time to consider adding them to your dividend-stock portfolio -- before Wall Street really catches on to the successes they've been having.
Exxon, with its $340 billion market cap, is one of the largest integrated energy companies on planet Earth. It's simply too large to turn on a dime; shifting direction takes it some time. However, the company has long been managed with a conservative bias. For example, long-term debt makes up less than 10% of its capital structure. That provides Exxon with ample flexibility to deal with whatever challenges appear, from volatile energy prices to the need to invest in moving in new strategic directions.   
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
The company's big problem in recent years has been falling oil production. Between 2015 and 2018, Exxon's output dropped roughly 6% from around 4.1 million barrels of oil a day to a little over 3.8 million. That's not the kind of trend that investors like to see, and the stock performance reflected their displeasure. Share prices remained under pressure even though Exxon promised that it was working on the issue, with plans to invest as much as $30 billion a year in the business -- developing onshore U.S. energy assets, offshore oil drilling, and natural gas projects (as well as on downstream processing and chemicals operations).   
For a time, the company had little to show for those efforts, and investors pushed the stock lower and the yield above 4% -- the high end of Exxon's historical range. But Exxon's production increased between the second and third quarters of 2018 and again between the third and fourth quarters to around 4 million barrels of oil a day. And that was on the strength of just one of its major investment areas: U.S. onshore drilling. It looks increasingly like the energy giant has started to turn the corner.   

XOM DIVIDEND YIELD (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS
That makes now an ideal moment for long-term investors to act: The stock is up a hefty 18% or so in 2019, but its yield is still in the 4% range. This suggests that investors are starting to recognize the improvements being made to the business, but there's still time to catch Exxon's high yield. Note, too, that the company is has put up a 36-year streak of annual dividend payout hikes. That's a record its closest peers can't match.
Next up is VEREIT, a net lease real estate investment trust (REIT) that got itself into legal trouble a few years ago. Typically, the net lease business is considered low risk because lessees are responsible for covering most of the costs of the properties they occupy. However, VEREIT was previously known as American Realty Capital Properties, a business built via a series of rapid acquisitions. The pace was frenetic and, eventually, caught up to the company in the form of an accounting error. When news of the issue broke in 2014, the stock crashed, and the dividend was suspended for a couple of quarters. The current 6.5% yield (after the dividend was reinstated at a lower payout level), perhaps understandably, is toward the high end of its peer group. The error, however, led to huge changes in the portfolio and the management team. 

VER DIVIDEND YIELD (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS
After bringing in industry veteran Glenn Rufrano to be its new CEO, the company changed its name and set out to fix the core business. It sold some of the less desirable assets it accumulated during the acquisition binge, reduced leverage, and got its balance sheet back to investment-grade status, and management set out clear goals for the property portfolio. Essentially, Rufrano gave Wall Street a yardstick by which to measure the company's operating performance. He and his team have basically achieved their primary targets at this point. And, after several years of divestitures, it looks like VEREIT is ready to start adding assets to its nearly 4,000 property portfolio again.   
The one big financial overhang that still has yet to be fully resolved is a series of lawsuits that stemmed from the accounting error. But the scope of the legal issues is starting to become clear, with VEREIT having settled with roughly a third of its shareholders for around $250 million. Assuming it can achieve similar results with future settlements, that will put the price of putting those troubles to bed at (being conservative) around $1 billion. The REIT has more than that available on its $2.1 billion revolving credit facility.   
Meanwhile, the dividend is only projected to eat up around 80% of 2019 adjusted funds from operations. That's a purposefully conservative payout ratio, to ensure that the dividend can withstand the impact of any further headwinds the company might encounter (like resolving the remaining legal disputes). Once its legal difficulties are in the past, investors are likely to price this REIT more in line with peers. If you act now, however, you can collect that 6.5% yield while you wait for its capable management team to resolve the final big issue on its plate.   
There's no question that Exxon and VEREIT are still dealing with adversity today. However, the management teams at both companies have made material progress in setting them on new paths. At this point, the progress is starting to show up, and once-hazy futures are beginning to get a little more clear. Investors who can handle the uncertainty that still remains at both companies can buy in now, and collect their generous yields before Wall Street fully catches on to the notable progress they're making.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


