On Tuesday, the Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI) made its best argument for why the five-year bull market could be far from over, rebounding from losses of more than 100 points to end the day up almost 90 points. Although positive earnings results gave the Dow an initial kick-start Tuesday morning, the average quickly gave up that early gain on fears that a looming stock market correction was imminent. Still, one area where policymakers have few worries is on inflation, and although the news isn't entirely good for energy giants Chevron (NYSE:CVX) and ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), consumers have to be happy about the trends on the price front.
What inflation?
The Bureau of Labor Statistics announced this morning that the Consumer Price Index rose 0.2% in March, following gains of 0.1% for each of the first two months of the year and leading to a 1.5% rise in year-over-year consumer prices. Core inflation also rose 0.2%, with rising costs of medical care, apparel, and airfare offsetting decreases in household furnishings prices, as well as the costs of recreation.
IMAGE CREDIT FLICKR/LINDSEY G.
The interesting tug-of-war on the inflation front, though, is happening in the energy arena. Prices of gasoline and heating oil fell sharply last month, bringing the energy-commodities sub-index down 2% in March. Yet energy-services prices soared, as electricity costs jumped 1.1% and gas-utility services rose 7.5%, continuing trends that have lasted all year.
The disparity between price trends in those two parts of the energy industry highlights the opportunities for companies that specialize in each of those areas. For ExxonMobil, Chevron, and other oil and gas production companies, economic challenges continue, with domestic crude fetching less in proceeds that oil on the world market. Even as natural gas prices have risen dramatically from their lows last year, they remain far below what you'd pay in other areas of the world, curtailing the economic incentive for Chevron, Exxon, and especially their smaller peers to drill natural-gas wells.
By contrast, though, the act of actually delivering energy in a form that consumers want and need has been much more lucrative lately. Electricity prices have risen more than 5% at the consumer level over the past year, while natural-gas service is up a whopping 16.4% over the same period. Those trends are partially responsible for the jump in utility-stock prices, with one prominent utility-stock sector ETF having soared to its best level since before the financial crisis -- despite interest rate concerns that would normally hold those shares back.
Inflation doesn't appear to be a concern for the stock market on the whole, but that doesn't mean investors should ignore the impact that price trends can have on particular industries. By digging into inflation data, you can get valuable insight that can make you smarter when it comes time to choose investments in promising sectors.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Intel (NASDAQ:INTC) is getting ready to report first-quarter results after this afternoon's closing bell. The chipmaker's stock has done well recently, more than doubling the returns of the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI) over the last year. More recently, Intel has surged 8% in the last month while the Dow came in relatively flat.

INTC DATA BY YCHARTS.
Much of the most recent climb comes from analyst comments, including two high-profile upgrades. But in the long run, there's really only one thing that matters to serious Intel investors. And here it is:

INTC DATA BY YCHARTS.
That's a 10-year perspective on the one thing that really moves Intel shares. When free cash flow dips, so does the stock. When it surges, Intel shares follow suit. The effect isn't always absolutely immediate, but it's undeniable in the long run.
Of course, this is exactly how stocks are supposed to be weighed. Discounted free cash flow analysis attempts to find the long-term value of a business based on the richness of its free cash flow. The analysis depends on a number of subjective assumptions, including future growth rates and the proper discount factor to account for investing in risk-free alternatives instead.
But it doesn't always work out that way. Intel is one of the purest examples I can find of free cash flow predicting the stock price. For example, fellow Dow component and tech giant Cisco Systems (NASDAQ:CSCO) currently trades much lower than a pure cash flow analysis would have predicted:

CSCO DATA BY YCHARTS
ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), on the other hand, has seen its share prices soar while cash flow dipped:

XOM DATA BY YCHARTS.
Investing is always complex, and cash flow alone can't make or break a stock. Cisco has been in full-fledged turnaround mode since 2011, for example, which doesn't inspire investors to pay the traditional quality premium for the company's shares.
And Exxon is investing heavily in new exploration and forward-looking oil alternatives, which prepares the petroleum giant for an uncertain future. That's a good thing, and worth paying a little extra for. If Exxon's investments work out as planned, the cash flow line should jump back up over the next few years. That might be worth a share price premium today -- but you must realize that there's some risk involved.
Back to Intel. Today's report will be packed with figures. Some will go up and some down; some are important, and others not so much.
The company doesn't offer cash flow guidance, but expects to report about $12.8 billion on sales and $2.4 billion of operating income, both within spitting distance from the year-ago report. Analysts are looking for 2% higher sales and a slight drop in bottom-line earnings per share.
But if you're interested in Intel as a long-term investment, the one number that really matters describes its free cash flow.
For your convenience, here's a look at Intel's free cash flow history in the last three years -- supposedly during the "death of the PC." Keep this one handy when you're looking at this afternoon's report.

INTC FREE CASH FLOW (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


