Shares of integrated energy giant ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) have nosedived in 2020 as oil prices have plunged to historic lows. With the stock set to be booted from the Dow 30, is this the end of an era, or an investing opportunity for those willing to step in while others are fearful? Here's a look at some of the key risks to understand before making a final call on this oil company.  
Let's get the biggest potential risk out of the way up front: An Exxon bankruptcy is highly unlikely in the near term. As it stands, the company has one of the strongest balance sheets of its integrated peers. Exxon's debt-to-equity ratio is roughly 0.38 times. Although Chevron's (NYSE:CVX) 0.25 times is lower, all of the European players have much higher debt-to-equity ratios. At the top end is BP at around 1.1 times. The truth is that 0.38 times is actually a fairly reasonable number, leaving Exxon with ample room on its balance sheet to handle more adversity.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Bankruptcy, however, is the worst-case scenario. There are a lot of things besides Exxon going belly up that can go wrong for investors. 
Exxon has increased its dividend for over three decades. During Exxon's second-quarter earnings conference call management again reiterated the importance of returning value to shareholders via a stable and growing dividend. However, major energy industry peers like BP and Royal Dutch Shell have both slashed their dividends at this point, and it's hardly unreasonable for investors to think Exxon could end up following that trend. In fact, at this point, the company's commitment to the dividend is really the only thing keeping it at its current level. Exxon's cash flow isn't sufficient to cover its dividend payments right now. 
Which brings the balance sheet back into play. Exxon's debt-to-equity ratio started the year at around 0.24 times. As oil prices and demand fell in the face of COVID-19-related economic shut downs, the company added debt to cover its material capital investment plans and the dividend. This is par for the course -- the oil space is highly cyclical and Exxon has used this tactic before. But there's a fly in the ointment. During the second-quarter conference call, management also hinted that it was unlikely to issue more debt. That limits the places where Exxon can find additional cash if it needs it. One easy way to free up capital is to cut the dividend, which costs Exxon around $3.7 billion a quarter and nearly $15 billion a year.   
The dividend is likely safe for at least the rest of 2020. But after that point there's materially more uncertainty. If oil prices remain moribund, a dividend cut is not out of the question.
As noted, Exxon is currently in the middle of a large capital investment program driven by weak production numbers in the past few years. There's a bigger takeaway here, in that Exxon is basically doubling down on oil at a time when peers, like Shell and France's Total (NYSE:TOT) have been pivoting toward electricity. The logic of that shift is pretty simple: Carbon-based fuels are being replaced by cleaner options, impacting everything from transportation to utility-level electricity generation. Exxon, however, has stressed that energy transitions have historically taken a long time and that oil will remain an important energy source for decades to come. This take is backed up by the International Energy Agency's long-term outlook -- even in a scenario where carbon emission reductions are a global focus.  

XOM DATA BY YCHARTS
And yet oil prices literally fell to zero in the early part of 2020, hinting that things aren't right in the energy space. The fact that oil drillers, for a brief moment, were paying customers to take their oil is frightening. However, prices are back up to the $40 per barrel space, suggesting that the near-term demise of oil is greatly exaggerated. As a commodity, oil is subject to supply and demand, with the current low prices (driven by COVID-19 demand dislocations) causing a material shakeout in the industry. Many exploration and production companies, especially in the U.S. onshore space, have filed for bankruptcy. Eventually, though it might be painful, supply and demand are likely to balance out again. Financially strong Exxon will be positioned to benefit when that happens. For investors who are bearish on oil, however, Exxon's decision to redouble its efforts on black gold should be very worrisome. 
There are some very material risks to consider when looking at Exxon and they are hard to quantify. While it is unlikely that Exxon is going to go out of business anytime soon, lingering low energy prices could lead to a dividend cut. And the oil space, which is what drives the company's top and bottom lines, is clearly in flux today. Exxon, once a stock appropriate for conservative investors, doesn't have quite the same risk profile as it did just a few years ago. If you are looking at the company's hefty 8% yield, you will want to think carefully before jumping aboard this name today. You might be better off with Chevron, which is on stronger financial footing, or Total, which is diversifying its business by adding electricity assets to its portfolio. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Three of the 30 stocks that make up the Dow Jones Industrial Average will be replaced at the end of this month. Standard & Poor's, which manages the blue-chip index, announced on Monday that current constituents ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), Pfizer (NYSE:PFE), and Raytheon Technologies (NYSE:RTX) will be swapped out with Salesforce.com (NYSE:CRM), Amgen (NASDAQ:AMGN), and Honeywell International (NYSE:HON), respectively.
Updates of the Dow's components aren't unusual. Not including changes stemming from mergers and acquisitions, Standard & Poor's altered the Dow's components most recently in 2018 when it replaced General Electric with Walgreens Boots Alliance. Like the recently announced restructuring, that one was ultimately intended to make the Dow a more accurate cross-section of the U.S. market.
Still, when 10% of an entire index's holdings are scheduled for replacement in one sweeping move, it could lead buy-and-hold investors that own Dow-based index funds to wonder how much buying-and-holding they're really able to do with those instruments. If that's you, don't worry. The overdue move actually makes it more comfortable for long-term investors to own Dow-based ETFs and mutual funds.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The announcement from Standard & Poor's explains:
The index changes were prompted by DJIA constituent Apple Inc.'s decision to split its stock 4:1, which will reduce the index's weight in the Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS) Information Technology sector. The announced changes help offset that reduction. They also help diversify the index by removing overlap between companies of similar scope and adding new types of businesses that better reflect the American economy.
The explanation touches on something not fully clarified within the announcement. Unlike most other indices that assign a "weight" -- or degree of influence -- to a holding based on that company's total capitalization, the Dow Jones Industrial Average is a price-weighted index. For example, constituent shares priced at $100 apiece cause more net change for the Dow than shares of a $50 stock do, even if that $100 stock represents a smaller organization. It's entirely possible the smallest name in the Dow (as measured by market cap) could still make the biggest impact on the index's daily point changes if that company's stock was the highest-priced ticker among the 30 that make up the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
In other words, the pricing methodology used creates a situation where the Dow isn't necessarily an accurate, collective reflection of the stock market's most established names.
That's not been the case of late. If anything, the index has been skewed for the exact opposite reason. The Dow's (and the world's) biggest company, Apple, also happened to be the highest-priced component for quite some time before its split announcement. The 4-for-1 split will drastically reduce the high degree of influence that Apple's stock has on the Dow in the future.
That's a good thing in that it will reduce the index's overall day-to-day volatility, but that big change alone would also mean a sudden and significant shift in the Dow's diversification and reflection of the broader market. By removing Exxon, Pfizer, and Raytheon and adding Salesforce, Honeywell, and Amgen, Standard & Poor's is also trying to restore some much-needed sector balance for the index. That will curb some of the Dow's prospective volatility without necessarily crimping its performance.
It's also worth noting ExxonMobil and Raytheon have been two of the Dow Jones Industrial Average's weaker performers since this time last year -- a subpar performance that's perhaps linked to the COVID-19 pandemic. Regardless of the reason, their foreseeable futures don't look much different than their recent pasts. The removal of these laggards may allow the Dow Jones Industrial Average to close the performance gap between it and the S&P 500.
For investors holding index-based holdings like the SPDR Dow Jones Industrial Average ETF Trust (NYSEMKT:DIA) or the Vanguard 500 Index Fund (NASDAQMUTFUND:VFIN.X), these big changes raise questions. The underlying strategy of passive, index investing is owning a broad piece of the market's best names for the long haul and letting time do the work for you. Now, as was noted, 10% of your portfolio is slated to be replaced in one fell swoop and there's nothing you can do to prevent it. The move may mean shedding some names you'd prefer to continue owning at this time. Maybe you liked the Dow's mix as it was: heavy on Apple, pharmaceuticals, energy, and defense, but light on tech, biotech, and industrials. Maybe you're not a fan of Amgen, which posted encouraging quarterly numbers in July, but otherwise hasn't been a high-growth machine of late.
The point is, the Dow's character will change. Perhaps it won't change dramatically, but its sector makeup has changed in a way that could impact its performance going forward.
If that's your concern, put it to rest.
If anything, these sizable changes to the Dow's makeup were actually overdue. The Dow has been less-than-ideally balanced for a while without most investors even realizing it. Apple's shares have been priced at unusually high levels for some time now. Energy name Chevron will still be a Dow component, and given that the oil and gas industry may never again be what it once was, one such name may be enough. Pfizer will be taken out of the DJIA, but drug company Merck remains. There's no biotech/biopharma stock of Amgen's ilk in the Dow right now, but there arguably should be. Raytheon will be shed, but Boeing will still be a component of the index. Perhaps most ironic is that, without the impending addition of Honeywell, there would still be no factory-centered industrial name in the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
Standard & Poor's moves, planned for the end of this month, will ultimately make the Dow a better-balanced, more diverse index.



Before you consider Pfizer Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Pfizer Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


For only the 57th time in the more than 124-year history of the iconic Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI), changes are about to be made.
On Monday, Aug. 24, S&P Dow Jones Indices, which monitors the 30 companies that make up the Dow Jones, announced that three current Dow components will get the boot before the market opens on Aug. 31, with three new companies taking their place. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Headed out of the Dow are:
The removal of Raytheon isn't a huge surprise after United Technologies merged with Raytheon earlier this year. The same could be said for Pfizer's dismissal after more than 16 years in the Dow. Rival Merck is similar, and having two pharmaceutical companies in the Dow always seemed a bit repetitive.
The real surprise here is that oil and gas giant ExxonMobil is being shown the door. ExxonMobil has been a Dow component since 1928, back when it was known as the Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey. Next to General Electric's roughly 110-year consecutive run in the Dow (which ended when General Electric was kicked out of the Dow in 2018), ExxonMobil's 91-year streak is the Dow's second-longest. And it's about to come to an unceremonious end. 
THE DOW JONES IS GAINING ADDITIONAL CLOUD-COMPUTING EXPOSURE NEXT WEEK. IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Replacing ExxonMobil, Pfizer, and Raytheon in the Dow Jones Industrial Average are:
Salesforce, the cloud-based customer relationship management solutions provider, will bring a cutting-edge look to the Dow while also beefing up its technology sector exposure. Meanwhile, biotechnology blue chip Amgen will presumably offer more growth potential than Pfizer.
Finally, diversified technologies company Honeywell returns to the Dow after previously getting replaced by Altria Group in September 2008. Prior to Honeywell's 2008 removal, it had been a fixture in the Dow since December 1925, when it was then known as Allied Chemical and Dye Corporation.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
On the surface, there appear to be a number of reasons S&P Dow Jones Indices made these changes.
As noted, Pfizer and Merck were somewhat redundant Big Pharma entries, so one was bound to get the boot eventually. The addition of Amgen provides a mature company with a potentially more robust long-term growth rate relative to a pharmaceutical stalwart like Pfizer.
An argument could also be made that the addition of Salesforce adds cloud-computing exposure to the Dow beyond the exposure offered by IBM.
But these aren't the real reasons the S&P Dow Jones Indices is removing ExxonMobil, Pfizer, and Raytheon. You see, the Dow Jones Industrial Average is a price-weighted index. This means that share price, not market cap, matters in calculating the indexes' point value. Thus, a $200 per share stock has twice the influence of a $100 stock, and four times the influence of a $50 stock, regardless of market cap.
ExxonMobil, Pfizer, and Raytheon have respective share prices of $42.22, $38.84, and $61.88, as of the closing bell on Aug. 24. Using the current Dow divisor of approximately 0.147, every $1 in share price is "worth" approximately 6.78 Dow points. Adding up the share prices of ExxonMobil, Pfizer, and Raytheon shows that they were only responsible for 969.21 Dow points on a combined basis. 
Comparatively, the incoming Salesforce, Amgen, and Honeywell have respective share prices of $208.46, $235.57, and $159.37. Admittedly, these incoming stocks, along with the pending 4-for-1 split of Apple, will cause the Dow divisor to be adjusted in the coming days. But the fact is that these changes are about share price and a company's relative influence on the Dow, and probably little else.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The Dow Jones is undoubtedly rich with history, but it's an almost unusable index by today's standards given its many flaws.
As stated, it's a share-price-weighted index that doesn't pay any heed to market cap. This means investment bank Goldman Sachs and its $71 billion market cap (but $207.34 share price) has nearly five times the influence of networking giant Cisco Systems, which has a $42.18 share price, but over twice the market cap ($178 billion).
What's more, the Dow doesn't do a great job of representing the varied sectors of the U.S. economy. Unlike the broad-based S&P 500, you'll find no utilities or real estate representation in the Dow Jones. There soon will be just one energy stock, Chevron, to go along with only one materials company, Dow.
Lastly, because the Dow's divisor is dependent on share price, some of the largest companies in the world with very large share prices could never join the index. For example, Amazon and Alphabet, the parent company behind Google search and YouTube, are the respective third- and fourth-largest companies in the U.S. by market cap. But with shares prices that are north of $3,300 and approaching $1,600, Amazon and Alphabet have no chance of joining the Dow without enacting a stock split.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average is a great index to reminisce about, but it shouldn't be taken seriously by investors as an accurate barometer of the health of the stock market or U.S. economy.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


