As easy as it sounds, it is quite difficult to follow the 'buy low, sell high' idea. It's tough to go against the collective wisdom of investors who don't like a sector or stock. This is the case with energy stocks currently, which are down now for more than a couple of years. The sustained weakness in energy stock prices has understandably frustrated even the most optimistic investors.
However, as oil and gas supply and demand come in sync, companies deliver consistently in the new environment, and the sector comes out of the current price cycle, investors' interest in the sector should rise. Admittedly, this isn't happening soon. On the contrary, effects of coronavirus and warmer weather are expected to negatively impact oil demand in the first quarter of 2020. Not a good news for oil companies which already posted dismal fourth-quarter performance. The negative near-term outlook has pressured energy stocks further, making them more attractive. Savvy investors who recognize this opportunity should eventually be rewarded.
In such a scenario, it is important to select the best performers, which can grow irrespective of oil prices. Three energy stocks -- ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP), and Enbridge (NYSE:ENB) -- are among the best to take advantage of the current disconnect between the company's fundamentals and its stock price. Each of these stocks offer attractive yields, so you are not just simply waiting for improved industry fundamentals to get your returns. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
Several factors make ExxonMobil a top bet in the energy sector. A large and diversified asset base places ExxonMobil in a strong position even when the industry trends aren't supportive. In fact, its scale allows it to make investments through the commodity price cycle when others cannot. Even though ExxonMobil's debt rose a bit recently, the company's leverage is very conservative.
ExxonMobil's higher production, contributed from its recent investments, should translate into improved top and bottom line growth in the years to come.  While Exxon's high investments look like a risky bet, the company's strategy is indeed quite sound. The company is making investments where it hopes to generate higher returns, while divesting assets that are not contributing much to its cash flows. This two-pronged approach should help ExxonMobil grow its earnings while keeping costs under control. 
Finally, the recent fall in ExxonMobil's stock price has made its yield very attractive. More importantly, given the company's track record of dividend growth, as well as its potential free cash flow growth, the yield looks pretty safe. ExxonMobil's more than 5% yield makes up for the time spent waiting for the stock to turn around.
ConocoPhillips is one of the few US oil and gas producers which have come out of the oil price crisis stronger. The company has transformed itself in the three years from 2016, when it had to slash its dividends. It has generated lots of free cash in the last couple of years. Further, it intends to keep returning this to its shareholders. ConocoPhillips' ability to grow cash even in the current price environment is remarkable, more so because very few others have been able to do so. The single largest factor that enabled ConocoPhillips to achieve this feat is its low cost of supply. A significant chunk of the company's oil and gas resources has an average cost of supply of less than $40 per barrel. Moreover, the company is adding only those resources which have development costs below $40 per barrel.     
Strong output in the Bakken, Eagle Ford, and Permian Basin has significantly contributed to ConocoPhillips production growth in recent years.  Additionally, the company expects production to remain robust in 2020. That should continue to fuel its dividend growth. 
ConocoPhillips currently offers nearly 3% yield. What's more, plenty of free cash flow and a solid long-term growth plan positions the stock well for future, irrespective of oil prices.
Enbridge stock has fared better than ExxonMobil and ConocoPhillips in the last couple of years. Consistent earnings and dividend growth, even during oil price turmoil, likely explains Enbridge's superior performance. Higher volumes on Enbridge's liquids and gas pipelines, significantly contributed by Spectra Energy acquisition, drove its recent earnings growth. What's more, Enbridge expects a long-term annual per share distributable cash flow growth of 5%-7%.  Enbridge's pipeline of secured capital projects should drive this growth. Considering positive natural gas demand outlook, the company's increased gas operations following the Spectra Energy acquisition should contribute to the growth. 
Enbridge's strong earnings get reflected in the company's solid dividend  growth. Higher earnings have also helped Enbridge in bringing down its debt-to-EBITDA ratio within its target range of 4.5 times to 5 times. All these factors make Enbridge's yield of about 5.7% very attractive.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Everyone seems to hate oil companies today, which is one reason why many of them offer dividends with big, fat yields. The problem is that there are very real reasons to be worried about energy stocks, with bankruptcies picking up, particularly in the onshore U.S. oil space. But all oil companies aren't created equal. Some are better built to weather the ups and downs in their highly cyclical industry.
Here are three high-yield oil stocks that have proven they have what it takes to survive and keep paying out generous dividends to the intrepid investors willing to buy and hold them when others grow skittish. 
ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) is probably one of the most-hated integrated oil and natural gas giants in the world because of its massive size. Though ESG investors have pushed hard to convince the energy company's management to change course, they have decided to double down on oil drilling. They are unapologetic about their plans to spend as much as $35 billion a year on capital projects like expanding onshore U.S. oil production and drilling in the waters around Guyana.   
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
In fact, over the next few years, Exxon is likely to see its production head higher after a few years of contraction. Not all of that capital spending, however, is being directed toward drilling. The company is also investing in its downstream operations, boosting its refining and petrochemical manufacturing capabilities. That's notable, because (like the next two companies to be discussed) Exxon is diversified across the energy sector. That gives its portfolio more balance, though right now, even its downstream operations are performing well in a tough environment.
The thing is, Exxon is built like a tank, so it can handle both the heavy spending and the weak business environment. For example, its debt-to-equity ratio is around 0.15, which puts it at the low end of the peer group and, frankly, in the low range for any company in any industry. Now add in a dividend that's been increased annually for 37 consecutive years and currently yields 5.8% -- toward the high end of its historical range -- and you'll see why contrarian investors should be investigating this stock today.   
Perhaps Exxon's decision to double down on oil drilling is just a little too much for you. In that case, you might want to look at peer U.S. energy giant Chevron (NYSE:CVX). It, too, is one of the largest and most diversified energy companies on Earth. But unlike Exxon, it has decided to be more conservative with its capital spending plans, earmarking "only" $20 billion toward them. Relative to its cash flow from operations, that's the lowest level in its peer group.   
That said, Chevron is benefiting from its previous spending, so its production is still growing right now. Thus, it is hardly giving up on oil or falling behind its peers (like Exxon, it has a major effort underway in the onshore U.S. oil space). The big difference is that Chevron is a way to invest in the energy sector without accepting the risks inherent in the big investments Exxon is making. 

XOM FINANCIAL DEBT TO EQUITY (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS
Chevron, meanwhile, is also extremely attractive when you look at its dividend history, dividend yield, and balance sheet. The company has increased its payout annually for 32 years. The yield is currently a robust 4.7%. And, like Exxon, its debt-to-equity ratio sits near the low end of the industry at roughly 0.15. Chevron's balance sheet is built like a rock, and the company should take the current oil downturn in stride.   
France's Total S.A. (NYSE:TOT) is a bit different from Exxon or Chevron. For starters, its debt-to-equity ratio is around 0.45 --but that's a manageable amount of leverage for the energy giant. In fact, the company has long operated with more debt than its U.S. counterparts. Meanwhile, it hasn't increased its dividend quite as regularly, but its payout has generally trended higher in recent years. (Note that Total is a foreign company, so the dividend that U.S. investors receive will fluctuate along with the relative valuations of the euro and the dollar.) That said, its roughly 5.9% yield is the highest of this trio. 

XOM DATA BY YCHARTS
But the really big difference between them is that Total is starting to invest outside the oil and natural gas space. In fact, in 2018 it paid roughly $1.8 billion to buy a European electric utility. That's just one of many efforts Total is making to diversify away from its carbon-based energy business. It has also been putting money to work in the renewable power generation (solar and wind) space, and investing in electric-vehicle charging operations, among other things.   
To be fair, Total is still primarily an oil and gas company. It isn't planning on drastic, overnight changes. It's more about using its core operations as a foundation to position itself for a clean-energy future. If that sounds to you like a better path than Exxon and Chevron are taking, then you'd be well served to take a close look at Total right now.
Oil industry executives are very clear about the future of oil -- it isn't going away as an energy source anytime soon and it's still in high demand. Put simply, oil continues to play an integral role in the world. The current price weakness is just par for the course for a commodity known for volatility. Exxon, Chevron, and Total are all built to deal with such ups and downs while continuing to pay investors well to stick around. 
Each of these global giants, however, is taking a slightly different approach. So if you like to buy when others are selling, now is a good time to look at this trio. You just need to select the one whose strategy best reflects your long-term view of the world's energy future. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


There's never a bad time to buy top dividend stocks for your retirement portfolio. But when a short-term setback sends a good company's share price downward -- and its dividend yield upward -- that can turn a good long-term buy into a great long-term buy. 
Three companies that have been hit by such setbacks are Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.A) (NYSE:RDS.B), ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), and Valero Energy (NYSE:VLO). Here's why they still look like long-term buys.
TOP DIVIDEND PAYERS CAN HELP YOUR RETIREMENT PORTFOLIO OUTPERFORM. IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
All of the integrated oil majors saw their share prices walloped during the recent Q4 2019 earnings season. Low oil, gas, and petrochemical prices combined with smaller refining margins left even these industry bigwigs facing lower revenues and poor earnings. And with oil and gas prices dropping even further in February, the industry may be in for a rocky ride in the short term.
But the drop in share prices caused dividend yields to go up, and Royal Dutch Shell's yield is now sitting at 7.1%, a two-year high. Although Shell's revenue and earnings were down on a year-over-year basis, the company still managed to churn out more than $10 billion of operating cash flow. Coupled with its $18 billion cash hoard, Shell should have no problems funding its best-in-class dividend. 
Meanwhile, over the long term, Shell is setting itself up for success through investments in its core oil and gas business, as well as a growing portfolio of renewable energy assets. For example, in the most recent quarter, the company acquired renewable energy retailers in Australia and the U.K., and is now providing 100% renewable electricity to more than 900,000 households. It also began deepwater oil and gas production at a new field offshore Brazil.
Shell's massive size and high yield make it an excellent and reliable choice for a retirement portfolio.
It was only last year when another oil major, ExxonMobil, hit a milestone of sorts: Its dividend yield surpassed 5% for the first time this century. However, just a few short months later, ExxonMobil's yield now sits at 5.7%. That's not quite as high as Shell's, but Exxon has something that Shell doesn't.
ExxonMobil is a member of an elite group of stocks known as the Dividend Aristocrats. These top dividend growers have increased their dividends every year, year in and year out, for at least 25 years. ExxonMobil has been increasing its dividend for 36 straight years. By contrast, Shell's dividend hasn't gone up since 2014. 
The company should be able to continue those dividend increases through its increasing production levels. In the most recent quarter, ExxonMobil began producing oil at its promising Stabroek Block offshore Guyana, moving from discovery to production in less than five years, which is a quick turnaround in the oil and gas world. ExxonMobil has announced 14 other oil discoveries on the block, projecting production of more than 750,000 gross barrels of oil equivalent per day from the site within five years, representing an 18.7% increase over current production from this site alone.
The conservatively managed Exxon has a strong balance sheet, with a debt-to-equity ratio of just 0.25, one of the lowest among the oil majors. Its dividend looks set to keep increasing for decades to come.That should keep rewarding shareholders well into their golden years.
Refiner Valero Energy isn't as dependent on the price of oil and gas as the oil majors, which produce the stuff. However, it's dependent on the "crack spread": the difference in price between the cost of a barrel of oil and the selling price of the refined products it can make from that barrel. In Q4, the crack spread was down, and Valero saw a small decline in revenue and adjusted earnings compared to Q4 2018. 
However, Valero is like Exxon in that it's consistently increased its dividend for the last 10 years. The company's recent price drop has pushed its yield up to 4.3%, which -- like Shell -- is the best yield in its class. 
Valero is also working to ensure its long-term viability through its investments in biodiesel. The company's joint biofuels venture with Darling Ingredients -- called Diamond Green Diesel -- is in the midst of a major expansion that should be complete by 2021. For now, Valero is still primarily a refiner of crude oil, but its biofuels business could be a major driver of growth for the company in the coming years and decades. 
Some investors panic when stock prices drop. But savvy dividend investors know that's the best time to look for bargains. With the energy industry particularly volatile right now, many solid dividend payers are on sale, including Royal Dutch Shell, ExxonMobil, and Valero Energy. Over the long term, though, these should prove excellent investments as part of a diversified retirement portfolio.



Before you consider Royal Dutch Shell plc, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Royal Dutch Shell plc wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


