Wall Street is an interesting beast, acting as a weighing machine over the long term but subject to emotional gyrations over shorter periods. It can be hard to fight the mood of the market, but if you can think long term while others are focused on the short term, you can find some solid investments. Three that are worth a very close look today are high-yielding ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), Tanger Factory Outlet Centers (NYSE:SKT), and General Mills (NYSE:GIS). Here's a quick rundown of why you might want to buy these stocks right now.
Exxon is offering investors a 4.4% yield. That's around the highest yield for the stock since the 1990s. Now is a pretty good time to pick up the shares if you are an income investor. Meanwhile, the company has an incredibly strong balance sheet, with long-term debt at less than 10% of the capital structure. That's low for any industry, let alone the often-volatile energy space.   
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The yield is so high today because investors are worried about the integrated energy giant's production and its return on capital employed (ROCE, a measure of how well Exxon uses shareholder cash). Both metrics have been declining in recent years. But things have started to look up on both accounts, as management begins taking action on its long-term plans.
On the production front, Exxon has increased its output sequentially in each of the last two quarters. Since the uptick was driven by just one of several focus areas, 2018 looks like it will turn out to be a key inflection point for the company's upstream (drilling) business.
With regard to ROCE, Exxon is stuck in the middle of its peer group after years of leading the pack. However, ROCE has started to turn higher again. Management's goal is to push ROCE from the mid-to-high-single-digits into the mid-teens. It expects to get there by taking greater control of its investment projects. Having greater operational control means it can use its expertise on getting better returns out of large, complex upstream and downstream assets. It also intends to focus its business around industry-leading assets, as management highlighted during its fourth-quarter earnings conference call.   

XOM RETURN ON CAPITAL EMPLOYED (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS.
Although Exxon's 2025 goal of doubling earnings is still a ways off, early results from the plan suggest that now is the time to buy this high-yielding energy name. Eventually Wall Street will realize that the giant company has started to turn the ship.   
Next up is Tanger, a real estate investment trust (REIT) that owns 44 factory outlet centers and sports a heady 6.2% dividend yield. Being in the retail sector is rough today, as investor preferences appear to be in a state of flux driven by online shopping -- what the media has hyperbolically called the "retail apocalypse."
That's overkill, even though the shift in shopping habits is very real. To put it simply, people will still shop at physical stores in the future, and it's worth noting that a large number of once online-only retailers have begun to open brick-and-mortar locations. What's really going on is that older, out-of-favor concepts are going away and new ones are stepping in to replace them.   
That's not a smooth process or one that happens quickly. So retail landlords like Tanger end up muddling through the transition, as they deal with bankruptcies and store closures. It can be tough, with lesser-quality enclosed malls taking the biggest hit and, frequently, shutting under the strain. But Tanger is different because it owns outlet centers, which are relatively cheap to operate, a low-cost option for lessees, and fairly easy to fill with replacement tenants. It just takes time.   

SKT DIVIDEND YIELD (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS.
And Tanger is financially strong enough to get through this transition in one piece. For example, total debt to adjusted total assets is roughly 50%, a reasonable figure for a property-owning company. Meanwhile, it covers interest expenses by roughly 5 times. Tanger is not at risk of going bankrupt. Its dividend, meanwhile, only eats up around 60% of its funds from operations (FFO -- a key performance metric in the REIT space). Not only does that mean the dividend appears very secure, but it also leaves plenty of cash for other purposes, like replacing tenants.   
What's most interesting about Tanger right now, however, is its current valuation. Although it stacks up nicely against industry bellwether Simon Property Group, Tanger trades at around nine times its projected 2018 FFO versus Simon's 15 times trailing 2018 FFO. Simon's yield, meanwhile, is a relatively meager 4.4%.
Rock-solid Tanger is built to survive headwinds like the retail apocalypse. When its portfolio repositioning starts to gain more steam, investors will likely reward it with a higher price. If you can look past the dire retail headlines here, now is a great time to pick up this high-yield stock.   
The last name in this trio is General Mills, which is offering investors a robust 4.4% yield today. Like Exxon, the yield here hasn't been this high since the 1990s. But there's a key factor to keep in mind: General Mills has been providing customers with packaged foods for more than a century, owning household names like Cheerios, Yoplait, and Betty Crocker. While customer preferences have shifted toward food perceived to be fresher and healthier, dealing with changing tastes isn't new to General Mills.

GIS DIVIDEND YIELD (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS.
To adjust along with the current industry shift, General Mills has been selling older brands (like Green Giant) and buying ones that are more on target with current customers (such as Annie's, Larabar, and Blue Buffalo pet food). It is also updating the products in its current lineup to better meet customer tastes. Once again, it will just take some time for the packaged-food giant to work through the transition.
That said, there is one troubling issue here: debt. Unlike Exxon and Tanger, General Mills has leveraged up to fund acquisitions, most notably the recent Blue Buffalo purchase. Long-term debt is nearly 70% above where it was before the deal was consummated in 2018 and makes up nearly two-thirds of the capital structure. Although interest coverage is still solid, at roughly 4.1 times in the fiscal second quarter, that's down from around 9 times a year ago. These are disconcerting numbers, to be sure.   

GIS TIMES INTEREST EARNED (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS.
However, General Mills' leverage isn't outlandish for an industry that sells lots of small necessity products to lots of end customers. And, as noted, the increased leverage is driven by a portfolio overhaul. It's expensive, but buying and selling brands like this isn't new for General Mills. With debt levels already starting to drop (over the last two quarters, the company has reduced debt by over $450 million), investors with a modest tolerance for uncertainty should consider buying this stock now before the deleveraging process starts to gain steam and investors reward the stock with a higher valuation.     
Exxon, Tanger, and General Mills are all companies in transition. That has investors worried, which has depressed the stocks and lifted their yields. If you can look past the near-term concerns to a future in which the transitions are further along, now is a great time to jump aboard.
Check out the latest Exxon, Tanger, and General Mills earnings call transcripts.
Financially strong Exxon is probably the least risky option here, appropriate for most investors. Tanger also has a strong balance sheet and a bright future, but the hype surrounding the retail apocalypse is pretty intense. You'll need a strong enough constitution to deal with (or perhaps ignore) the dire retail headlines. General Mills, meanwhile, is the riskiest of the trio largely because of its somewhat aggressive use of leverage. If you can afford the time and effort to monitor its balance sheet, however, taking on the current uncertainty is likely to be well rewarded.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Value investing often ends up leading investors into just one or two out-of-favor sectors. You can't create a diversified portfolio going that route. So it's important to broaden your horizons, and at times your view of what constitutes value. Here are three stocks from vastly different industries that all look absurdly cheap right now: Twitter (NYSE:TWTR) in the technology space, ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) in energy, and Abbvie (NYSE:ABBV) in pharmaceuticals. 
Check out the latest AbbVie, Exxon, and Twitter earnings call transcripts. 
Brian Stoffel (Twitter): I'm not your traditional value investor. Five stocks constitute over 50% of my real-life holdings. One isn't profitable, and the average P/E of the other four stocks is north of 50! With that as a backdrop, of all the stocks I own, Twitter appears to be the best value play right now.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Before you roll your eyes, consider this: The company may not ever reach the same user base as Facebook -- and that's OK. CEO Jack Dorsey has largely accepted this, and narrowed Twitter's workforce and scope to match this reality. That has resulted in a much more profitable venture: While "monetizable daily active users" (mDAU) were up 9% in the fourth quarter of 2018, non-GAAP net income jumped a remarkable 73%.
Twitter is wrestling with a lot of issues right now -- none more so than how to police abusive behavior without enforcing a nanny-state that tramples on the free speech rights of its users. That's a herculean task that few have ever faced before and none -- including Facebook -- have ever managed. It also has investors pessimistic.
But that pessimism has created opportunity. Twitter is the undeniable source for live, in-the-moment events. It has signed over 100 partnerships as a result. And over the past 12 months, it generated $1.34 billion in cash from operations -- and free cash flow of $856 million. The company currently has a P/E below 19.
It might not sound like value to most, but remember that free cash flow grew by 55% last year. And that was despite capital expenditures jumping 73%. The fastest-growing companies will often never be considered to have value stocks, but with Twitter, you might be getting the next best thing: growth at a very reasonable price.
Reuben Gregg Brewer (ExxonMobil Corporation): The shares of integrated energy giant ExxonMobil are trading near 30-year lows based on price to tangible book value (PTBV). Its current PTVB, meanwhile, is nearly 30% below its 10-year average for the metric. For reference, peer Chevron, also trading at a multiyear-low PTVB, is only 10% below its 10-year average for this valuation metric. Exxon looks absurdly cheap right now. Which helps explain the impressive 4.4% dividend yield.
Investors are clearly worried, and perhaps rightly so. In recent years, Exxon's production has fallen, and its return on capital employed (which tracks how well it puts shareholder money to work) has dropped into the middle of its peer group. But the oil giant has a plan to get back on track, with a long-term goal of roughly doubling earnings by 2025. That goal, meanwhile, only requires that oil sell for around $50 to $60 a barrel.   

XOM PRICE TO TANGIBLE BOOK VALUE DATA BY YCHARTS.
Early results are starting to look pretty encouraging. For example, production increased sequentially between the second and third quarters and between the third and fourth quarters. That's a notable shift from the steady drift lower over the last few years. And that upturn was driven by just one of the company's long-term production growth drivers (onshore U.S. oil drilling). Its ratio of return on capital employed, meanwhile, has started to tick up again as Exxon has moved to take greater control of its big growth projects. 
Not only does Exxon look cheap, but it also looks like it's at a key inflection point. Once investors catch on to that, Exxon's discount will likely narrow...and that big dividend will shrink. Now is the time to do a deep dive.
Keith Speights (AbbVie): I'd call a stock that trades for only 8.5 times expected earnings inexpensive. If the stock also was likely to generate average annual earnings growth of close to 10% over the next five years, I'd say it was a bargain. And if the stock also paid out a dividend that yielded over 5%, I'd jump at the chance to buy it. One stock that meets all of these criteria is AbbVie.
There's usually a reason that a stock has an attractive valuation. In AbbVie's case, investors are worried about what will happen to the company's fortunes with its top-selling drug, Humira, facing competition from biosimilars. I don't think those concerns should make long-term investors afraid of AbbVie, though.
For one thing, Humira won't be threatened by biosimilars in the U.S. market until 2023. Humira appears likely to remain the world's best-selling drug at least through 2024. That gives AbbVie plenty of time for its other products and pipeline candidates to step up.
Cancer drugs Imbruvica and Venclexta continue to enjoy strong momentum. Orilissa, which has already won approval for managing endometriosis pain and could secure another indication in treating uterine fibroids, has blockbuster potential. AbbVie also should have huge winners on the way with immunology drugs risankizumab and upadacitinib.
AbbVie believes that it will more than offset the anticipated sales declines for Humira. With its bargain valuation and attractive dividend, I think this big pharma stock is a solid pick right now



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


