
Sometimes, what looks like a normal trading day on Wall Street actually hides a lot of turmoil among investors, as market participants strain to figure out how to balance positive and negative news from various corners of the business world. On Tuesday, stock markets were generally higher, with the Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI) climbing 95 points as of 12:30 p.m. EST. Yet beneath that calm facade, Coca-Cola (NYSE:KO) led the bullish charge with gains of more than 3%, while oil stocks ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and Chevron (NYSE:CVX) were the leading losers in the Dow as oil prices continue to gyrate wildly. Let's take a look at these competing forces and what investors should know about them.
Coke is it -- for today
Coca-Cola's gains came on the heels of what many would initially have seen as a troubling earnings report this morning from the soft-drink giant. Net income for the quarter plunged 55% from year-ago levels, with sales dropping 2%. For the full 2014 year, net income dropped 17%, proving just how much Coca-Cola has slowed down over the past year.
Yet investors instead focused on looking forward. Global volume returned to growth, albeit at just a 1% rate during the fourth quarter. Moreover, currency impacts played a big role in Coca-Cola's revenue decline, with currency-neutral sales rising 4%. Despite assertions from management that 2015 will continue to challenge Coca-Cola with the need for aggressive transition in pursuit of its growth initiatives, shareholders believe that the worst could be over for the beverage giant. If the company can make good on its plans to try to cut $3 billion from its annual spending while also looking for ways to boost the price points on premium drinks, then Coca-Cola could regain some of its lost glory in 2015 and beyond.
Energy puts pressure on markets
At the other end of the spectrum, energy-related stocks were among the worst performers in the Dow today, with Chevron leading the way with about a 1% decline. Crude oil prices fell on Tuesday, with West Texas Intermediate falling more than 4% to go below the $51 per barrel level.

SOURCE: FLICKR USER KATSCOOL
The declines in oil have already prompted aggressive action from energy companies, with Chevron having announced a $35 billion capital-expenditure budget for 2015, down 13% from 2014's levels. So far, ExxonMobil hasn't said how much it expects to invest internally this year, but with the company wanting to keep its dividend climbing, the big question is whether Exxon would have enough cash flow to boost its payouts to shareholders while also spending on capital expenditures.
Even though crude prices have only rebounded slightly, many energy stocks have climbed quite a bit further from their recent lows in the hopes that oil has found a bottom. If crude prices start falling again, though, that confidence could come to an end and send energy stocks -- and shares of companies that benefit from energy-related spending -- back downward for an extended period.
Stock-market investors will need to stay on their toes as crosscurrents send some stocks higher and others lower. As the bull market gets longer in the tooth, investors will want to look closely at their specific stock holdings to make sure that their companies are in the best possible financial shape to weather whatever storms might come in the future.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


ExxonMobil's (NYSE:XOM) management team treats conference calls just like Bill Belichick does a press conference following the end of a game. Trying to get executives' opinion about where the oil market is heading or what they plan to do now that oil is cheap is like trying to get blood from a stone. But just because ExxonMobil management is tight-lipped does not mean these calls do not offer valuable nuggets of information. Here are four things from Exxonmobil's most recent conference call that management thinks anyone who invests the company should know.
We can't be bothered with predicting oil prices...
Many of us try to invest in oil and gas companies based on crude oil prices and where they are headed. But this approach can be extremely shortsighted when looking at a company such as ExxonMobil that needs to make decisions about exploration and production that might take years -- decades even -- to develop. To do this, according to Vice President of Investor Relations Jeff Woodbury, the company can't use oil prices as its measuring stick: 
[A]s I've said previously, that demand assessment that we do on an annual basis really underpins our business strategies and our investment plans. So as we look forward, we see oil demand growing at about 0.8% per year. That's underpinned by transportation and chemical needs. In the gas sector, we see gas demand growing by about 1.5% to 1.6% per year and that's primarily underpinned by power generation and industrial demands. Now overall, demand growth is largely underpinned by the non-OECD growth, so when you think about our business, the scope of our business and how we lay out our business strategies and our investment plans, they really are focused on the long-term expectation around energy demand.
Rather than getting caught up in trying to predict where oil prices will head over the next couple years, ExxonMobil instead looks at global demand over long time horizons and makes its investment decisions accordingly. If you plan on investing in a company such as ExxonMobil, then you should consider that time horizon as well.
... but we have to be ready for oil to be really cheap
ExxonMobil produces more than 2 million barrels per day of oil, but that is chump change compared to the 90 million barrels or more produced daily on a worldwide basis. Since oil supply is so segmented -- largest producer Saudi Aramco only has a 10% market share --Woodbury said the company must prepare for oil prices to do anything at any moment.
First, regardless of where we are in our business cycle, this organization has a very strong culture of driving down our cost structure. Whether it be self-help in our operating costs or capital efficiency in our project execution, we expect to lead the cost curve in capturing savings, especially in downturns like we're experiencing today.
Second, we challenge all of our investments to ensure that we are creating long-term shareholder value through the cycle and remember that we are price takers. We don't assume price growth in the future, but we really focus on those things that we can control like costs, liability, and of course, our project execution. 
This "hope for the best, prepare for the worst" method to capital allocation has been a large reason why ExxonMobil has produced the best returns on capital employed among its peers for the past several years.
Keep the ship steady
It can be tempting for a company that produces a commodity to shift its capital spending to accommodate for lower prices in that commodity. Such moves can boost profitability in the short run, but can have a major impact years down the road since the first projects to be cut are those in their nascent stages. According to Woodbury, though, ExxonMobil does its best to avoid falling in that trap; instead, it tries to maintain spending through down markets in order to thrive further down the road.
The thing that I would really point out that distinguishes us is that, as we've said many times, is that we can invest through the business cycle and it present some opportunities that will be able to lower that cost structure and improve our overall longer term returns, given the financial capability that we have.
As long as ExxonMobil can maintain capital discipline through times of feast and famine, it should capture market rebounds much better than many of its peers. 
When there's blood in the water
One clear advantage ExxonMobil has over many of its competitors is a superb balance sheet. This gives the company the flexibility to take advantage of downward swings in the commodity cycle by making strategic acquisitions. This is one of those times, and Woodbury hinted the company is looking for those opportunities:
We'll continue to be disciplined in our investment approach throughout the cycle, but we won't forgo any attractive opportunities. We have a significant debt capacity, but we will maintain our financial flexibility, and we'll assess the cash and our funding options under a range of outcomes and take a balanced approach to meet those obligations.
With a AAA credit rating and a debt-to-capital ratio of less than 9%, ExxonMobil has an immense amount of financial flexibility to seek out opportunities to grow reserves and production. This could prove incredibly useful if oil prices remain low and some companies with great assets but shaky balance sheets come with hat in hand.
What a Fool believes
If any company out there is ready to handle a long downturn in the price of oil, it's ExxonMobil. The oil giant's global footprint with assets in every aspect of the oil and gas game, as well as a balance sheet more secure than the Cheyenne Mountain nuclear bunker, makes it a great investment for those looking to build long-term wealth -- even if management doesn't come out and say so explicitly. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021



SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL.
What: Shares of integrated oil and natural gas behemoth ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) moved fractionally higher by $0.06 to close at $91.56 on Monday despite receiving a rating downgrade from research firm Argus to "hold" from "buy."
So what: According to Michael Burke, the covering analyst for Argus, ExxonMobil has vastly outperformed its oil and natural gas sector peers over the past year. This is largely due to its diversified business that comprises upstream, downstream, and chemicals operations, as well as its relatively low levels of debt compared to its equity.
However, Burke believes that outperformance may be coming to a close, as he holds a bleak outlook regarding ExxonMobil's ability to grow its reserves and production. Burke worries that ExxonMobil may reach for growth via an acquisition, which is something that hasn't always worked out. Furthermore, Burke cites the company's plan to reduce its share repurchases to just $1 billion in the first quarter of 2015 from a prior average of $3 billion per quarter as a reason that shareholder sentiment may be negatively affected.
Now what: The $64,000 question that needs to be asked here is whether or not Argus' downgrade has merit. In others words, are you better off not buying ExxonMobil here?
In my personal opinion, I don't see much to fear if you're buying shares over the very long term, but I could certainly see merit in waiting out this drop in crude prices.
On one hand, there's no telling how low crude oil prices could go. Although recent commentary from OPEC has given this small rally in oil some legs, oil supply in the United States still remains high and total drill rig counts really haven't fallen by a substantial amount yet. We probably need to see some consolidation among the small and medium-size drillers and a significant shrinkage of rigs among large players before we can safely proclaim there to be a "bottom" in oil. In the meantime, it means ExxonMobil's revenue and profits will take a hit.
On the flip side, ExxonMobil has a smorgasbord of global assets to fall back on in spite of currently weak oil prices. It could temporarily have a hard time boosting production, but that's OK because long-term energy forecasts are on its side.
ENERGY OUTLOOK THROUGH 2040. SOURCE: UNITED NATIONS AND EXXONMOBIL.
According to ExxonMobil's energy outlook through 2040, energy demand is projected to more than double to 1.2 quadrillion BTUs over the next 25 years. That bodes well for ExxonMobil, which is sitting on a number of onshore drilling opportunities in the U.S. and a handful of offshore deepwater finds off the coast of Africa.
In sum, I believe it's possible ExxonMobil could head lower over the short term, but would have no qualms about holding on to my shares or nibbling here if I had no intention of selling over the next five years.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


