You've got to hand it to Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell -- this guy really knows how to spook a stock market.
On Wednesday, the Fed chair warned investors, who have been hoping -- planning even -- on a V-shaped recovery from the recession just as soon as the COVID-19 shutdown is over, that they may have to wait a bit longer for things to improve. "Recovery may take some time to gather momentum," warned Powell, and while that's happening, "the passage of time can turn liquidity problems into solvency problems."  
The result: ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) shares down are 4.7%. Harley-Davidson (NYSE:HOG) stock is off 5%. General Electric (NYSE:GE) stock is down 6.1%.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Seriously? That's the whole reason that Exxon, Harley, and General Electric are down today? Apparently so.
There's no evidence of bad news that might be taking down any of these three major industrial companies today. The contrary is more accurate. Just yesterday for example, it was reported that Harley-Davidson's CEO had spent $2.1 million buying up shares of his company's stock (says TheFly.com).
Exxon stock won an upgrade today, albeit from a relatively unknown analyst, Redburn.   
And even if there's no good news spin on GE today, neither does there appear to be any bad news. No one's downgraded the stock, for instance, nor is there any sign of the stock's price target being adjusted lower.
Instead, what we're left with is a somewhat bearish note from the Fed Chairman, and concerns about liquidity and solvency hanging in the air. My best guess for why investors are selling off shares of Exxon, Harley, and GE, therefore, is that at the Fed Chair's suggestion, investors are taking a closer look at the balance sheets of these three companies, and finding that with net debt levels of $6.6 billion (Harley), $48.2 billion (Exxon) and $57.2 billion (Exxon), none of these three companies are entering the recession in the finest of financial fettles.
The longer this recession drags on, the worse things could get for companies trying to support mammoth debt loads.



Before you consider General Electric Company, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and General Electric Company wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


The U.S. economy is slowly opening up in the hopes that the worst of the COVID-19 pandemic is over. Oil prices will likely remain depressed from the shockwaves of lower demand, namely from transportation and industrial use cases.
Although the headwinds facing the oil industry are far from over, here are three oil stocks to buy right now for investors that have the patience to give the industry time to recover.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Oil continues to provide over 90% of the energy used in transportation around the world. Its use in household products, clothing, tech, and more make it a relevant part of our everyday lives, but the current oil downturn has really done a number on the industry as a whole.
With companies cutting spending or going bankrupt, supply will likely decrease in the coming year or two, which could help prices recover.
As one of the largest exploration and production (E&P) companies in the world, ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP) is a staple in the upstream segment of oil and gas. Its financial structure and balance sheet are now arguably the best of any U.S. E&P company because ConocoPhillips mostly funds its growth with operating cash flow, all the while keeping a large amount of cash in reserve. 
Meanwhile, the strategy for other E&P companies is simple: take on debt to acquire a large number of assets that, with scale, achieve a low breakeven cost per barrel. This debt-dependent strategy of other E&Ps is severely backfiring in the current low oil-price environment.
The stock's decline has resulted in a rising dividend yield that is now 3.5%, an attractive offer for income investors. ConocoPhillips currently has a P/E ratio of 12.7 and a price-to-free cash flow (FCF) ratio of 12.2.
Royal Dutch Shell (NYSE:RDS.A) (NYSE:RDS.B) had spent the last five years increasing its free cash flow and rewarding shareholders with one of the highest dividend yields and total payments in the industry, until the company announced a historic 66% dividend cut in its recent first quarter earnings announcement. Even with the cut, Shell will still yield over 3%, but it's certainly a setback for income investors.
Since Shell relied on high cash flow to support its dividend, the dividend cut looks to be a wise decision, assuming cash flow will fall dramatically in the coming quarters.

RDS.A FREE CASH FLOW DATA BY YCHARTS
If Shell hadn't cut its dividend, its obligation would likely have exceeded cash flow in the short term and forced the company to borrow debt. Shell also cut its 2020 spending by around $5 billion, or 20%, giving it even more dry powder to get through this crisis.
Looking past the dividend cut, Shell appears well-positioned to rebound from the present downturn.
Starting in 2018, Shell's integrated gas business emerged as the dominant sector in the company's portfolio, replacing downstream to make up the majority of net income in 2018 and 2019.
Shell sees a bright future in the growing liquefied natural gas (LNG) market and renewables. According to Bloomberg, Shell led supermajors in clean energy investments last year. Shell's focus is mainly on electric power generation through solar, and further "electrification" efforts like charging stations for electric vehicles.
Shell seems to have made a wise decision to expand its gas efforts since natural gas prices haven't fallen nearly to the extent of oil. Still, Shell's business is under strain, but investors will be able to pick up shares at a 15% discount compared to where they were trading a week ago before the dividend cut was announced.
Unlike Shell, ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) mainly works within the oil and gas industry to improve its profitability and reduce its environmental footprint. Although management was arguably overly opportunistic at the start of the pandemic, the company has since announced a 30% reduction in capital expenditures and a 15% reduction in cash operating expenditures.
Exxon's production cuts and overall exposure to the oil downturn will be a tough pill to swallow in the short term, but the company has made a commitment to paying its dividend that currently yields the most in over 10 years at around 8%.
To its credit, Exxon has the second-lowest debt to capital ratio and second-lowest debt to equity ratio of all supermajors, just behind first-placed Chevron and just ahead of third-placed Shell.

CVX DEBT TO CAPITAL (ANNUAL) DATA BY YCHARTS
Although the company has done a good job improving its balance sheet, spending was still a concern leading into the pandemic. After its spending cut, Exxon could continue its streak as a dividend aristocrat, having raised its dividend for 37 consecutive years and not cutting its payout since 1948 (split-adjusted).
It bears repeating that investing in the oil and gas business is a risky proposition in the short term but could prove worthwhile over the medium to long term.
ConocoPhillips has spent the past five years reducing its break even cost-per-barrel while improving its balance sheet. Its financial structure and balance sheet are now arguably the best of any U.S. E&P company.
Shell, paired with Exxon's dividend, provides a nice combo of gas, oil, and Shell's renewable efforts, all the while still getting a solid overall dividend. Together, the average yield of the three stocks is close to 5%, but it's a more reliable source of income than chasing after high-yielding oil and gas stocks that lack the financial discipline and deep pockets to make the risk worthwhile.



Before you consider Royal Dutch Shell plc, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Royal Dutch Shell plc wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


The energy-producing world is dominated by five major companies: BP (NYSE:BP), Total SA (NYSE:TOT), Shell (NYSE:RDS.A) and (NYSE:RDS.B), ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), and Chevron (NYSE:CVX). Prior to the start of this year, these majors had more than $112 billion in capital expenditures planned. Then 2020 happened. Let's see what the big energy names' drastic pullback in spending might mean for investors.
All together, these five majors have unveiled nearly $29 billion in cuts to capex for the remainder of 2020 - roughly 25% of what they originally planned to spend. Some waited for quarterly announcements to announce these spending cuts, while others issued these announcements between earnings reports during the first quarter. 
The deepest cuts came from Exxon, which cut $9.9 billion from its capex for the year, or 30%, in its May 6 Q1 earnings release. 
The energy major with the smallest reduction in capital spending forecast for 2020 was Shell, which slashed a relatively modest 20% of its capex budget.
The graph below shows what amount of capex was planned before 2020, and what is now planned for the entire year for each company. 
DATE FROM COMPANIES' SEC FILINGS. CHART BY AUTHOR
The capex cuts mostly pared back upstream projects, where energy such as oil and natural gas is extracted from the ground -- particularly their exploration budgets. With oil prices so low, exploring for new wells to produce from makes little sense. 
Capital spending typically does not need to be reduced in downstream assets such as liquefied natural gas (LNG) or solar and wind projects, which generally aren't affected by the current downturn in oil prices.
These spending cuts translate to new jobs not being introduced into the world economy when we desperately need them the most. Not all of the near $30 billion in cut spending would have paid for new workers, but given all the labor these scuttled projects would have required, a good number of potential jobs have evaporated along with the reduced spending. 
For investors hoping for growth in energy companies, capital spending is likely a good indicator of which companies have both the ability and the intention to grow. Companies use capital spending to increase assets or invest in projects that increase cash flow. Cutting back on that spending will prohibit growth in areas where these companies need it the most.
Finally, a large chunk of the remaining capital spending merely maintains existing assets. Most capital spending in downstream segments of companies goes toward keeping plants and processing facilities up to safety codes -- installing new safety systems, for instance, or complying with new local noise or air pollution requirements. This type of capex spending does nothing to help a company grow its output or cash flow. 
For investors looking to buy into energy stocks while commodities are low and the market is beaten down, these reductions can shed light on which companies are looking to diversify into other energy sources.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES
For example, Total stated that it will solarize its industrial facilities through its capital spending -- part of the six gigawatts of solar power projects it has announced for 2020. 
While Exxon and Chevron have started to invest in renewable energy sources, those companies would have to spend a lot more money to catch up to Total and Shell. 
For those still invested in energy companies, it helps to ask whether or not companies are properly diversifying out of volatile parts of the industry, and into either less volatile segments or sustainable energy projects. Companies that aren't getting the hints the industry is throwing out may soon be left in the dust. Investors will likely see more capex cuts in the coming years if those companies don't start diversifying. 



Before you consider Royal Dutch Shell plc, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Royal Dutch Shell plc wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


