The market has struggled to stay on course today, and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI) beat back earlier losses to rise 35 points into the green as of 2:35 p.m. EDT. Twelve of the blue-chip index's 30 member stocks were in the red. ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) has been a particularly tough drag on the Dow so far, falling 1.1% as instability in the Middle East has weighed on energy stocks. Meanwhile, Johnson & Johnson (NYSE:JNJ) shares were down 0.6%. Let's catch up on what you need to know.
Can inflation follow prices?
The broader economic picture started things off on a high note, as new data showed consumer prices jumped by 0.4% in May. While many U.S. consumers are still feeling the pinch from the slow recovery, the gains made in prices are good news for companies that have struggled in the wake of the financial crisis -- and also a positive sign for inflation, which has failed to rise to a sustainable 2% growth level that the Federal Reserve has targeted. Additionally, if inflation continues to increase in the coming months, the upbeat trend could the Federal Reserve to boost interest rates from record lows. Still, the U.S. will need the economy to promote increasing wage growth in the near future as well, especially considering the need for growing consumption in the long-term economic picture.
SOURCE: WIKIMEDIA COMMONS
The international picture is in focus today for the energy sector, particularly for hard-hit ExxonMobil. Investors are keeping a close eye on the ongoing crisis in Iraq, where insurgents push toward the city of Baquba, less than 40 miles from the capital of Baghdad. More than 60% of OPEC oil growth in the coming years is predicted to come from the country in coming years, per The Wall Street Journal. For ExxonMobil and its investors, the turmoil in Iraq, and and growing concerns that violence could spill over to other areas in the region, are a big threat to stable prices and a clear production picture for the future.
Exxon has struggled with production in its recent past. In the last quarter, oil and gas production fell by more than 5% year over year and negatively affected the company's revenue, even as Exxon buoyed its profitability with cost-cutting measures. Fortunately, there is hope on the horizon despite the Middle East trouble: North American energy production has taken off recently, with U.S. output lifting America into the top spot among global oil and gas producers. Exxon alone expects to begin production from 28 new projects by 2017, with major oil sands investments in Canada riding high for the company's future. If the company can make the most out of its North American projects, Exxon can overcome the volatility from the Middle East.
Still, energy investors should keep a watchful eye on developments in the region -- particularly on whether the violence in Iraq and Syria destabilizes the production picture in the region even further.
Elsewhere on the Dow today, Johnson & Johnson has fallen in the wake of Medtronic's (NYSE:MDT) $43 billion purchase of rival medical device maker Covidien. The buy will add significant scale to Medtronic's portfolio and put the company on a better track to compete with Johnson & Johnson in terms of size and -- most importantly -- negotiating leverage with cost-wary hospitals. While Johnson & Johnson and Medtronic focus their core medical device businesses in different areas, with the former's largest niche in orthopedics and the latter's in cardiac devices, Medtronic's purchase of Covidien puts the the buyer in greater contention to challenge J&J's successful surgical products division. While J&J's pharmaceuticals remain its major growth driver for the near future, investors should keep an eye on the emerging battle between these two top medical device producers.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


The Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI) had lost a slim eight points as of 11 a.m. EDT Tuesday. Investors let a couple of troubling economic reports dampen their enthusiasm, as inflation at the consumer level rose more than expected last month while housing starts fell substantially. Financial stocks still posted solid gains, but energy giants ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and Chevron (NYSE:CVX) helped drag the Dow lower, reflecting the uncertainty in the oil market as participants try to assess the impact of sectarian fighting in Iraq.
SOURCE: CHEVRON.
The news from the Middle East shows few signs of getting better anytime soon, as the Obama administration sent added security personnel to protect the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad and is reportedly weighing the possibility of sending special operations forces troops to assist the Iraqi military in holding off insurgent activity. Early pronouncements from the Obama administration emphasized its desire not to send regular ground troops back to Iraq, but the situation militarily remains in flux.
Yet from an economic standpoint, markets aren't reacting much further to the news. Oil prices actually fell back slightly today, with West Texas Intermediate crude holding below $107 per barrel. Given the moves upward that ExxonMobil and Chevron made following the spike in oil prices after the initial word of the conflict inside Iraq, short-term traders appear to believe that the current trajectory of hostilities is already baked into oil prices, and therefore the upside left for the Dow's energy stocks isn't as great as some investors might think at first glance.
SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL.
Moreover, both Chevron and ExxonMobil have taken steps to keep things business as usual in their global operations. Late last week, Chevron sold off about $1.3 billion in assets to the government of Chad, including a 25% interest in oil fields in the African nation's Doba Basin and a pipeline system to carry crude oil to the African coast in Cameroon. The move should allow the company to focus more on what it considers to be its highest-potential projects in ongoing efforts to keep production levels high. Meanwhile, ExxonMobil yesterday reaffirmed its commitment to its Russian business opportunities, with CEO Rex Tillerson speaking in Moscow despite the ongoing tension between the U.S. and Russia over events in Ukraine.
Developments in Iraq could obviously have a major impact on oil prices, as they have in the past. For investors in the Dow Jones Industrials, looking at how Chevron and ExxonMobil react to changing conditions will help in assessing risk levels both in the energy markets and to the stock market overall.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


