It's an impressive feat for a company to increase its dividend every single year for 25-plus years, with only around 130 companies managing to achieve such a streak. That's not a lot of names, but it's a good starting list for income-focused investors. In fact, it's broad enough that at least some names are likely to be working through tough times -- which means, if you are selective and patient, you can find some bargains.
Today, ExxonMobil Corporation (NYSE:XOM), Tanger Factory Outlet Centers, Inc. (NYSE:SKT), and AT&T, Inc. (NYSE:T) are all offering big yields for investors willing to think long term.
Exxon is projecting that it will double earnings by 2025 if oil prices remain around where they are today. And earnings could increase by as much as 225% if oil prices go up to $80 a barrel. Those are pretty impressive projections, but it will take a lot of work for Exxon to get from today to 2025. And a lot of fortitude for investors to stick around.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The integrated energy giant's recent performance has been weak, relatively speaking. For example, production has been falling for several years, and its once industry-leading return on capital employed numbers are now just middle of the pack. But this conservatively run giant isn't sticking its head in the sand and simply hoping for better days. While some peers are pulling back, Exxon is increasing capital spending from around $24 billion in 2018 to a run rate of $30 billion by 2023.   
That spending is going toward new oil and gas drilling in the U.S. onshore market, offshore in Guyana, and liquified natural gas in Mozambique, among other production efforts. Exxon will also be growing its chemicals and refining footprint along the way, too. All of these investments, though, will take time to play out, with Exxon putting its expertise in bringing large products to fruition to greater work -- which should help to encourage its return on capital employed figures back into the mid-teens.   
With Exxon shares offering a roughly 4% yield, the highest level in around 20 years, long-term investors may want to take a close look at this dividend champion, with 36 years of annual dividend hikes under its belt, while it works through its current issues. Long-term debt at just 10% of the capital structure, meanwhile, suggests it has the balance sheet to bring its plans to fruition even if oil prices weaken again. Just go in knowing that Exxon is emphasizing high long-term returns, not a quick fix -- a fact it noted during its second-quarter conference call.   

XOM DIVIDEND YIELD (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS.
Tanger is a real estate investment trust, or REIT, that is focused on owning outlet malls. These are interesting assets that are very different from the enclosed malls feeling the pain today as anchor tenants like Sears and J. C. Penney shut their doors. Tanger has no exposure to such companies. However, the REIT hasn't completely avoided the impact of the so-called retail apocalypse, with names like Nine West and Rockport falling into bankruptcy and closing stores at Tanger's outlets. It's just much easier to fill small spaces than cavernous anchor locations.   
Tanger, meanwhile, is using the same playbook it has in previous years when retailers were struggling. It is offering rent concessions to keep the occupancy at its 44 outlet centers high (maintaining the desirability of its centers for customers and tenants) and limiting capital spending on new facilities. Pulling back, meanwhile, has freed up a material amount of cash, which Tanger is putting to work reducing debt and buying back shares. Better yet, for dividend investors, the REIT expects its funds from operations (FFO) payout ratio to be less than 60% in 2018, providing material safety for the dividend -- which has been increased through thick and thin for 25 consecutive years.     
Things may look ugly for a little while, which is why Tanger's yield at nearly 6% is as high today as it was during the deep 2007 to 2009 recession. But if history is any guide, it will survive this tough spot just like has others in the past.
AT&T has increased its dividend for 34 consecutive years. However, AT&T from 34 years ago isn't the same AT&T of today, noting that former spin-off SBC bought AT&T and rebranded itself with the AT&T name in 2005. But that's just one piece of the puzzle, because AT&T has shifted from a landline telephone company to a cell phone company. And now it's transitioning again, with the government-contested purchase of Time Warner Inc. AT&T is now calling itself a telecommunications, media, entertainment, and technology company.   

T FINANCIAL DEBT TO EQUITY (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS.
There really is a lot of change happening at Ma Bell today. And the transformation process isn't likely to be over, either, with companies like Netflix and Amazon forcing continued innovation in many of AT&T's core sectors. Now add in the fact that AT&T's purchase of Time Warner Cable has added notable leverage, with both debt to EBITDA and debt to equity at 10-year highs. This isn't a slam-dunk investment option -- there's a fair amount of uncertainty, here.
That said, with a yield of 6.2% (the high end of its historical range), more aggressive investors are being paid very well to hang around through this transition process at a company with a long history of rewarding investors via dividend hikes. If that sounds like you, then AT&T should be on your watchlist.
There's that old saying about diamonds in the rough, which gets to the core issues here. Exxon, Tanger, and AT&T all have their challenges today, but given time, they could all turn into very rewarding investments as they work through tough patches. And investors looking for big yields from company with incredible histories of annual dividend increases would do well to get to know each of them today. If you wait too long, you might just miss the opportunity to grab their historically high dividend yields.



Before you consider AT&T Inc., you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and AT&T Inc. wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Dividend investing would be easy if all you needed to do was find a few high-yield stocks. But it isn't that simple because every dividend payer isn't equal. You'll need to make sure you're buying companies that can continue paying their dividends through thick and thin, which requires looking for a special breed of company.
Here are four dividend investing tips that will set you on the right path.
Investing is mostly about the future, but examining the past can tell you a lot about a company. That's particularly true when it comes to dividends -- which is why, every month, I scan through the list of Dividend Champions, Dividend Achievers, and Dividend Challengers maintained by The DRIP Investing Resource Center. Champions have increased their dividends for 25 or more years, Achievers have increased annually for between 10 and 24 years, and Challengers have upped their dividends for between five and nine years. The best part is -- these lists are free.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
A long history of annual dividend increases shows that a company has made a commitment to rewarding shareholders via regular dividend hikes. Using this as a screen cuts down your possible options to just a few hundred names from the thousands of dividend payers that you'd otherwise have to sift through. It's a who's who of the dividend world, including such giants as The Procter & Gamble Company, The Coca-Cola Company, and ExxonMobil Corporation (NYSE:XOM), each of which have hiked its dividend annually for 25 years or longer.
That said, some great names and opportunities won't be on these lists. For example, a company that has paused its dividend for a year or two (but didn't cut) will drop from the list until it's gotten back to five years worth of hikes. A good example of this today would be Royal Dutch Shell plc (NYSE:RDS.B).
During the energy downturn, Shell didn't increase its dividend, but it didn't cut it, either. And now that oil prices are starting to move higher again, the international oil giant is starting to return more cash to investors via stock buybacks. Dividend hikes are likely to start up again in the not-too-distant future.
This is why I regularly check the "changes" section of the lists noted above. This is where you'll find companies that have been dropped with a brief explanation of why. Sometimes, it's worth the extra work to find out more.
The next step is to pick a few stocks to research from these lists. But what do you look for? If you're like most investors, yield is the first place you start. That's perfectly fine, since you need some way to identify candidates for further research.
Choose a yield target that's right for you. My target level is around 4%. I scan the lists above and take a quick look at the stocks that are near or above that level. But I don't stop with the yield, and you shouldn't either.
I also make sure to check the historical growth rate of the dividend over time. The one-, three-, five-, and 10-year dividend growth rates are available on the table, as well. A steadily growing dividend is great, but if that growth doesn't keep up with inflation, your buying power actually will shrink over time.
For example, First Financial Corp. is a small bank with 30 years of annual dividend hikes behind it. But over the past decade, the annualized dividend increase was only 1.5%. (Annualized increases were even lower over shorter periods.)

MMP DIVIDEND PER SHARE (ANNUAL). DATA BY YCHARTS.
Now look at Magellan Midstream Partners, L.P., a high-yielding midstream partnership with 18 years of annual increases and a trailing 10-year distribution-growth rate of just under 11%. Although I cherry-picked these two examples, the chart above tells you all you need to know to understand why dividend growth is just as important as yield. If you're looking for income, screen for yield, but also make sure to check dividend growth over time.
At this point, you probably have a nice short list of stocks prepared for some deep dives. But what do you want to look at? I suggest you start with a scan of a company's balance sheet. Companies with a lot of leverage get into financial trouble more often than companies with little or no debt. Exxon and Shell are examples of this.
Although Shell is a great company, it carries a lot more debt on its balance sheet than Exxon. When oil prices headed lower in mid-2014, both companies took on additional leverage to support capital investment plans and their dividends. With more leeway on the long side of the balance sheet, Exxon kept right on hiking its payout. Shell chose to hit the pause button, which was a stressful event for shareholders who use their dividends to pay living expenses.
These are both good companies, and Shell has proven that it can manage its business with a notable level of debt (it tends to keep extra cash on hand as a counterbalance), but Exxon still was the energy company I chose to buy. And then there's Italian energy giant Eni S.p.A., which made even greater use of leverage than Shell, and wound up cutting its dividend. You get the idea: Too much leverage is a bad thing.

ENI DEBT-TO-EQUITY RATIO (QUARTERLY). DATA BY YCHARTS.
That said, you'll also want to pay attention to the business you're buying. Simply put, does the company's direction and business approach make sense to you?
For example, Altria Group, Inc. (NYSE:MO) has 49 years of annual dividend increases behind it and a fat 5.2% yield, but it sells cigarettes. Being a "sin stock" could exclude it from your list, but so, too, could the fact that its customer base has been shrinking for years.
Generally speaking, cost increases have been driving dividend growth. However, I'm not convinced that Altria, no matter how impressive its brand portfolio may be, can keep raising prices to cover a shrinking customer base. Clearly it's doing other things to grow, like expanding into new tobacco and nicotine niches, but the business model just doesn't sit well with me.
Creating these two screens is quicker than you think and can help you save a lot of research time. And you can use your common sense: Favor companies with low leverage and strong business models.
Now that you have a small list of approved stocks, when do you buy? The answer for me is to start by looking at how the current yield compares to the company's historical yield trends. If a company has a 4% yield, but the yield normally has been around 6%, I don't do much digging -- it's priced at a premium. However, if the yield is 4% and that's toward the high end of its historical range, I get pretty excited.
Exxon's roughly 4% yield today is toward the high end of its historical range, by the way. There are reasons for this, of course, but it has plans to deal with the issues it currently faces and the financial strength to see them through.

HRL DIVIDEND YIELD (TTM). DATA BY YCHARTS.
This also is the step where I deviate from almost everything I just said. There are some companies that would pass every screen above except that they seem always to have yields that fall below my 4% cutoff. These are what I call my wish-list stocks, including companies like 3M Company and Johnson & Johnson.
If the yield at either of these companies gets toward the high end of their historical range, I take a close look. That's exactly what led to my purchase of Hormel Foods Corporation when its dividend popped up to the 2% range. That's high for Hormel. When I coupled it with a history of mid-teens annualized dividend growth, I decided to step aboard.
At this point, you have some basics to get you going when you look for dividend stocks. These aren't hard-and-fast rules because every investor is different. And as my purchase of Hormel shows, sometimes you have to bend the rules a little bit. However, they will help you avoid yield traps and financially weak companies -- which can help save thousands.
By integrating these rules into your dividend investing approach, you'll be in a better position to make thousands because the rules will help you focus your attention on the best dividend payers -- which is what long-term income investors really want to own, anyway.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


