The silver shimmer of Silicon Valley is replacing the oil slicks that once gilded the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) in black gold. That silver shimmer is Salesforce.com, and it's replacing the longest-tenured DJIA component: ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), effective Aug. 31. 
Exxon's removal adds another red flag to a series of headwinds that have pushed its shares down over 40% for the year. Is there more pain ahead, or is there reason to believe Exxon can turn it around? 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Going back a few years further to 2007, Exxon was the largest company by market capitalization. Limited supply and rising demand led to high oil prices that pole-vaulted revenues and profits to new heights. As the oil industry's leader, Exxon became a staple in market indexes and a key holding for investors young and old.
During the height of the Great Recession, oil endured immense volatility, with the monthly average for WTI crude reaching as high as $133.88 per barrel in June 2008 and then as low as $41.12 that December. After a brief setback, oil prices took to the skies, averaging over $90 a barrel for the five year period between 2010 to 2014.
After the oil crash of 2015, prices never recovered, and neither have Exxon's earnings.

XOM REVENUE (ANNUAL) DATA BY YCHARTS
Its stock has lost value over the past 20 years compared to an increase of over 130% for the S&P 500.
Exxon's stock has fallen for more than the simple fact that oil is out of favor. In cold hard numbers, Exxon simply isn't making as much as it was in the golden period between 2005 and the beginning of 2015. On top of that, its debt burden is ballooning and its free cash flow (FCF) has gone negative as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic's impact on oil and gas demand and prices.

XOM FREE CASH FLOW (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS
Lower FCF means Exxon is now supporting its dividend with debt, which is unsustainable over the long term.
Exxon would argue that its investment thesis remains strong. Oil still dominates the transportation industry and natural gas is the United States' leading fuel source for power generation.
Exxon points to developing countries as a primary growth market for oil and gas, pointing to fossil fuels' competitiveness with renewables in emerging markets. Before the onset of the pandemic, Exxon expected its earnings could double by 2025 in a moderate pricing environment.
What Exxon needs is a stable oil price where it can reach the margins needed to pay a growing dividend and achieve its long term production goals. For that to happen, Exxon would like for oil demand to start outpacing supply. However, that's partially dependent on the energy mix of developed and developing economies as well as the investment appetite of its key competitors. Given recent decisions by rival majors Royal Dutch Shell, BP, and Equinor, there's reason to believe that Exxon's competitors would rather be renewable energy stocks than compete in oil and gas over the long term. 
Removal from the DJIA isn't necessarily a perpetual banishment. On August 31, Honeywell International (NYSE:HON), the third-largest U.S. industrial stock by market capitalization, will re-enter the Dow after a 12-year hiatus.
In Honeywell's case, the reentry is well deserved. The company has one of the best balance sheets in the industry and has outperformed the broader markets since its departure. Its future looks bright as it grows market share in its core business and expands further into operational technology (OT) and the industrial internet of things (IIoT). 
In Exxon's case, S&P Global made it clear that it was reducing redundancies in the index and adding new companies to better reflect the economy. That came in the form of removing Exxon but keeping Chevron. Therefore, a comeback for Exxon could mean that it either has to outright outperform Chevron, post years of stable earnings growth and reduce its debt, oil and gas as a whole regains favor, or some combination of the three.
Given the leaps and bounds that it took for Honeywell to get back in the index, the road to reentry won't be easy for Exxon. For now, the stock's dividend obligation is drowning it in even more debt. The upside for Exxon doesn't look great, but given that its stock has fallen substantially, it looks like a reasonable hold at this time. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


On August 31, ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) will exit the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) in favor of software giant Salesforce.com. The removal marks a transition from the old economy to the new economy, but it also leaves Chevron (NYSE:CVX) as the only remaining oil stock in the index.
Here's why that removal could be a red flag for Exxon investors, and a buying opportunity for shares of Chevron.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Despite its flaws, the rich history of the DJIA and its tethering to certain exchange-traded funds makes it relevant, even today. For Exxon, removal from the Dow is a sign that oil and gas remain out of favor on Wall Street. 
Based on S&P 500 Global's comments on its reasons for the index changes, it would seem that its opinion is that Chevron better reflects the American economy than Exxon. The idea was to reduce redundancies in the index by keeping just one oil stock because the energy sector represents a smaller percentage of the stock market than it used to. Today, the sector comprises less than 5% of the S&P 500 and less than 3% of U.S. large cap stocks, down from 6.5% at the end of 2015.
S&P 500 Global's selection of Chevron over Exxon is just the latest blow in a series of disappointing years for America's largest oil company. Over the past decade, Exxon has barely kept pace with the overall energy sector, whereas Chevron has outperformed it significantly.
XOM TOTAL RETURN PRICE DATA BY YCHARTS
Chevron's outperformance, particularly over the past five years, is due in part to its spending reductions. Chevron was outspending Exxon and suffering negative free cash flow (FCF) for years as it invested in assets that were not yet operational. But now, Chevron is able to generate more FCF than Exxon while spending less money and operating with less debt on its balance sheet. Exxon has reduced its estimated $33 billion in 2020 capital expenditures by 30% down to just $23 billion, but Chevron plans to only spend $14 billion, down 40% from its original estimate of $20 billion.

XOM FREE CASH FLOW (ANNUAL) DATA BY YCHARTS
Chevron is simply a leaner oil and gas company right now. Its focus is on short cycle investment in the Permian Basin, which is easier to ramp up or scale down based on market conditions. 
On the other hand, Exxon has major long term investments in Guyana, Papa New Guinea LNG, and potentially in the "pre-salt" offshore blocks off the coast of Brazil, to name a few.
Given the years of planning and procurement needed for these investments to pay off, Exxon has essentially committed itself to higher spending. It can't afford to simply turn off the tap without taking on massive sunk costs. This commitment is why Exxon estimated capital expenditures to be a whopping $30 billion to $35 billion per year over the next five years.
There are several reasons why Chevron is now the primary representation of oil and gas in the DJIA. Aside from its performance being superior to Exxon's, Chevron has demonstrated industry-leading financial discipline. Even with the addition of more debt to weather the impacts of COVID-19 on the oil and gas sector, Chevron's balance sheet remains less leveraged than those of its competitors. 
In addition to its performance and financial discipline, Chevron has shown better profitability than Exxon in both its upstream and downstream businesses.
Most recently, Chevron displayed some impressive patience when it walked away from an expensive acquisition in 2019. Chevron's patience paid off, and it was able to take advantage of the current market downturn by scoring a discount on Noble Energy in July. 
Whether you're interested in Exxon or not, its removal from the DJIA is a historic event that marks the next step for an economy that may be less influenced by oil and gas. Chevron staying in the index instead of Exxon doesn't necessarily alter the investment thesis for either company. Instead, it more so symbolizes investor sentiment that favors financial strength and capital discipline (Chevron) over big spending and more debt from a higher leveraged capital structure (Exxon).
Exxon's commitment to long term projects means it's unlikely to reduce capital expenditures any time soon. And with Exxon set to distribute over $5 billion more in dividends each year than Chevron, it's hard to see a scenario where Exxon can afford to reduce debt.
Given Chevron's financial discipline, outperformance, and savvy negotiating skills, the decision to remove Exxon from the DJIA looks to be the right call. Even with a slightly lower dividend yield, Chevron is the better stock to own right now. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


