The massive nation of Russia is one that few of the world's largest oil companies are ignoring, and for good reason. The country has some of the largest oil reserves in the world. While estimates vary widely, Russia is believed to have proven reserves of 60 billion-200 billion barrels of oil, with the Energy Information Administration putting the total at 80 billion barrels.
The country also has enormous amounts of shale oil, with the Bazhenov shale alone believed to contain nearly eighty times the amount of oil that is in North America's Bakken shale. Thus, it is little surprise that companies such as ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and BP (NYSE:BP) have been ignoring the U.S.-imposed sanctions on Russia and have been expanding their operations in the country. It is likely that these companies are hoping to make a discovery similar to the one that Spain's Repsol just announced.
Repsol makes major discovery in Russia
On June 23, Repsol (OTC:REPYY) reported that it made two discoveries in the Karabashsky 1 and 2 blocks located in Western Siberia. These two finds could contain a total of 240 million barrels of oil, making them two of the largest discoveries in recent history. They are also the largest discoveries in Russia in two years. In addition to making these two discoveries, Repsol has significantly increased its production of hydrocarbons in the nation this year. In 2013, Repsol's Russia operations produced an average of 14,600 barrels of oil equivalent per day. This average has increased by 20.8% so far in 2014 to 17,690 barrels of oil equivalent per day.
As should be immediately obvious, this is an impressive growth rate and a very large find. The hope of results like this is almost certainly one of the reasons why ExxonMobil and BP (among others) were willing to take the risk of defying the sanctions against the country.
Let's have a look at the activities of BP and others in Russia, to illustrate how significant the presence that these companies have in the country is.
BP's Russian operations
BP first began operating in Russia during the early 1990's and eventually acquired a 25% stake in what was, at the time, the fourth largest oil producer in Russia. Obviously, this represents quite a substantial investment. In 2003, the company merged its Russian operations with TNK to create TNK-BP, a joint venture with more than 50,000 employees and more than $5 billion in net income annually.
TNK-BP was eventually sold to Rosneft, easily one of the largest energy companies in the world. This sale netted BP a 19.75% stake in Rosneft, which actually produces more oil than any other publicly traded company in the world.
ExxonMobil's partnership with Rosneft
ExxonMobil has also been aggressively expanding into Russia. The company has operated in the world's largest nation for twenty years, but it was only recently that the company really moved toward building very large operations there.
In 2011, ExxonMobil entered into an agreement with Rosneft to explore and produce oil jointly in Russia, the United States, and elsewhere. This was expanded further in 2012, when the two companies agreed to engage in several multi-billion dollar exploration projects and development projects together. Clearly, this represents an enormous investment on the part of ExxonMobil, but it is one that has already begun to pay off.
ExxonMobil and Rosneft to develop four huge fields
The investment is, fortunately, already beginning to pay off for ExxonMobil. The two companies recently announced that they will be jointly developing four very oil-rich reservoirs in the Russian Arctic. These four reservoirs are the Anisinsk-Novosibirsk and Ust-Oleneksk reservoirs in the Laptev Sea and North Wrangel-2 and South Chukchi Shelf reservoirs in the Chukchi Sea. These projects certainly have the potential to deliver impressive results for ExxonMobil from its Russian operations like Repsol has seen from its own.
Foolish takeaways
In conclusion, Russia offers significant opportunities for oil and gas producers. These opportunities are so significant that several companies have been ignoring the sanctions that the United States and Western Europe have put on Russia. This could certainly prove to be rewarding for shareholders in these companies as these opportunities begin to pay off.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Investors focus a lot of attention on what Warren Buffett buys through Berkshire Hathaway (NYSE:BRK.A)(NYSE:BRK.B). But it can be equally as informative to understand what he doesn't buy.
The two scary investments
In his 2011 annual letter to Berkshire Hathaway shareholders, Buffett devoted nearly 2,000 words of commentary in a section named "The Basic Choices for Investors and the One We Strongly Prefer."
What were those choices?
So which two did Buffett suggest were dangerous and that he would avoid -- and suggested that we should, too?
The currency-based assets and the nonproductive ones.
And it wasn't even close.
BUFFETT MAY SIT ON TOP OF AN IMAGINARY WORLD OF CASH. BUT HE DOESN'T SUGGEST YOU HOLD ONTO IT. SOURCE: WWW.INSIDERMONKEY.COM
The danger of currency
Buffett said that while the safety of investments in things like bonds are often lauded -- U.S. Treasury bonds had a yield of 5.7% since he took the helm at Berkshire 47 years ago -- he suggested that in reality "they are among the most dangerous of assets."
The principal concern is inflation, the reality that with almost every passing day, little by little a dollar loses its value. In the letter Buffett said in the same 47 years, the value of a dollar had fallen by a stunning 86%, meaning that "it takes no less than $7 today to buy what $1 did at that time."
A bond -- or an investment like it -- would need to return 4.3% just to maintain its purchasing power over that time. And while government bonds averaged a 5.7% yield, it's critical to remember that was ¡©pre-tax. As a result, an investor who fell in the 25% tax bracket would've lost the remaining 1.4% in tax payments.
All of this is to say that the return would've effectively been nothing.
While Buffett suggested there are times when investing in bonds made sense, he also believed "right now bonds should come with a warning label."
Buffett concluded his commentary on bonds by adding:
Today, a wry comment that Wall Streeter Shelby Cullom Davis made long ago seems apt: "Bonds promoted as offering risk-free returns are now priced to deliver return-free risk."
The hazard of gold
Moving beyond bonds, the second type of asset Buffett cautions against are those "that will never produce anything, but that are purchased in the buyer's hope that someone else -- who also knows that the assets will be forever unproductive -- will pay more for them in the future."
The principal one is gold. And the value of gold, and those "investments" like it, is that its value isn't determined by what it can capably produce or yield, but instead an investor hopes that someone will simply be willing to pay more for it in the future.
In Buffett's words:
This type of investment requires an expanding pool of buyers, who, in turn, are enticed because they believe the buying pool will expand still further. Owners are not inspired by what the asset itself can produce -- it will remain lifeless forever -- but rather by the belief that others will desire it even more avidly in the future.
Buffett goes on to contrast the value of every ounce of gold on the planet -- worth $9.6 trillion in total -- against an investment in every acre of cropland in America and 16 -- yes, sixteen -- ExxonMobils (NYSE:XOM), which would amount to $8.6 trillion.
Given that perspective, he suggests no one would sensibly select the gold -- which would fit inside a baseball infield  -- against every acre of farmland and an investment in 16 ExxonMobils.
And based on the return of ExxonMobil versus gold since the letter was written in February 2012, it's tough to disagree with him:

The adoration of businesses
With all that in mind, it should come as no surprise Buffett explains why investing in productive assets is so fundamental and valuable. Unlike the first two, their value isn't predicated by what people are willing to pay for them in times of booms and busts, but instead an ability to create valuable goods or services people desire.
No matter how the underlying value is determined, Buffett suggests that "people will forever exchange what they produce for what others produce."
He concludes by saying:
Berkshire's goal will be to increase its ownership of first-class businesses. Our first choice will be to own them in their entirety -- but we will also be owners by way of holding sizable amounts of marketable stocks. I believe that over any extended period of time this category of investing will prove to be the runaway winner among the three we've examined. More important, it will be by far the safest.
Buffett wants us to see that investing in first-class business won't only deliver the best returns, but it will also provide the least risk.


Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


