Although we don't believe in timing the market or panicking over daily movements, we do like to keep an eye on market changes -- just in case they're material to our investing thesis.
U.S. stocks broke their three-day losing streak today, with the S&P 500 gaining 0.8%. The narrower, price-weighted Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJINDICES:^DJI) gained 0.7%, closing above 16,000 for the first time.
Last week, I highlighted three reasons why Warren Buffett bought ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) for Berkshire Hathaway's (NYSE:BRK.B) equity portfolio. (He did so in size, too -- the position was valued at $3.4 billion at the end of the third quarter.) This week, short-seller Jim Chanos, who famously bet against failed energy company Enron, offered a few reasons of his own -- for steering clear of the shares, characterizing ExxonMobil as a "value trap." Is Mr. Chanos right? Did the Oracle of Omaha just make a monumental mistake?
At the Reuters Global Investment Outlook on Tuesday, Chanos described his negative thesis regarding the energy supermajor's business and its stock:
In terms of the integrated oil companies, the business demonstrably has gotten worse and it's for a simple reason: the cost of finding and replacing reserves has gone up. Let's just use Exxon as an example. Their revenues are down year-over-year yet the amount of capital they've employed in the business continues to grow. Their cash flow has dropped dramatically and, where in the past Exxon had been able to finance dividends and its buybacks out of free cash flow, it's no longer able to do that. It only basically finances half of that (dividends and buybacks).
Exxon used to have returns on capital of around 30% -- an amazingly profitable business. Well, it's been cut in a third in the past year. Now it's about 20%. So, it's telling you that on the margin, these companies are increasingly finding it difficult to cheaply replace reserves. And, I've basically called them 'liquidating trusts'. They're not the values they used to be. They're having now to borrow to finance a lot of the financial engineering that they're doing to keep their shares up at the same level.... It's not a value stock, it's a value trap.
Presented with Buffett's investment, Chanos replied: "He's got his reasons but unmistakably the returns are dropping." Let's be clear: The only reason Warren Buffett buys a stock in size is because he thinks he will make market-thumping returns over a very long period of time.
I don't disagree with many of the points Chanos makes in the two paragraphs above. Many are simply factual observations one can quickly verify by looking at the company's financial results. But I disagree with his conclusion: Yes, profitability has dropped and, yes, ExxonMobil may no longer be the value it used to be. Nevertheless, a 20% return on capital remains well in excess of ExxonMobil's cost of capital. Furthermore, the company does not need to deliver the same returns it has produced since 1970 (a better than 375-fold total return) in order to provide investors with a more than adequate return during the next 40 years.
Finally, costs outpacing revenues is not an irreversible trend, contrary to Mr. Chanos' implicit line of reasoning. Hydrocarbon resources are in finite supply, yes, and the price of extracting dwindling reserves may increase. I want to emphasize may -- this isn't a matter of certainty -- not for some time, in any case; but oil prices aren't static, either. As Mr. Buffett's longtime right-hand man, Berkshire Hathaway vice-chairman Charlie Munger told an investment conference this summer: "Oil is absolutely certain to become incredibly short in supply and very high priced... The oil in the ground that you're not producing is a national treasure."
Did Warren Buffett just invest in a value or a value trap? Jim Chanos is a very astute investor, certainly someone you don't want to dismiss out of hand; but I'm siding with Mr. Buffett here.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


After selling its stake in Exxonmobil (NYSE:XOM) almost 30 years ago; Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway (NYSE:BRK.B) is reunited with the worlds 2nd largest company after Berkshire picked up $3.4 billion worth of shares in Exxon over the past couple of quarters. Not so say that Exxonmobil is a poor decision, but it may not be the best purchase in the big oil space today. Instead, Mr. Buffett should have looked at Chevron (NYSE:CVX) instead.
There are three reasons that Chevron is a better pick than Exxonmobil today. One of those reasons is that Chevron generates a much better return per barrel of oil equivalent than Exxon and all of the other members of big oil today. The reason for that is because Chevron produciton mix is much more concentrated on oil than on natural gas like Exxon and other big oil players BP (NYSE:BP) and Total (NYSE:TOT). Tune into the video below to learn the two other reasons that Chevon is a better buy today than Exxonmobil.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021



