ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) has treated its investors like royalty over the years. The energy company has grown its dividend at an average annual rate of 6.2% over the past 37 years, increasing it every single year during that timeframe. That puts it in the elite class of being a Dividend Aristocrat.
However, while Exxon has been an excellent dividend stock over the years, that doesn't necessarily mean it will be one in the future. To gauge its potential, we need to dig a bit deeper, looking at not only the sustainability of the current payout but also its growth prospects. Here's a look at whether Exxon can maintain its status as a top-tier dividend stock.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
Exxon's dividend currently clocks in at a 5.1% yield, which is well above the 2% average of stocks in the S&P 500. While higher yields can often imply higher risk, that's not the case with Exxon's payout. Through the third quarter, the oil giant had generated a hefty $23.4 billion in cash flow from operating activities, which was more than enough to cover the roughly $11 billion it paid out in dividends. While cash flow is down from $27.4 billion in the year-ago period because of all the volatility in the oil and gas market, the company still generated lots of excess cash after paying its dividend to invest in expansion projects.
Exxon, however, has invested $22.7 billion on expansions so far this year, outspending its cash flow by a wide margin. That's by design, though, as the company is in the middle of an ambitious long-term growth program. It's bridging the gap by selling assets and using its top-tier balance sheet. Overall, the company has sold $4.8 billion in assets this year, which is ahead of its pace to achieve its target of selling $15 billion of assets by 2021.
With a business that's generating a gusher of cash, a top-tier balance sheet, and an active asset sale program, Exxon's high-yielding dividend appears to be on sustainable footing.
Exxon's multiyear expansion program should increase its output by 1 million barrels of oil equivalent per day (BOE/D) by 2025. That implies a 25% increase from 2017's baseline level, which is a huge jump for such a large oil producer. The company believes that its investments to grow its upstream production, as well as its downstream refining and chemicals businesses, will fuel a 140% surge in its earnings and cash flow by 2025 from 2017's level. That assumes the global oil price benchmark, Brent, stays around that year's average of about $60 a barrel.
Exxon is investing in several major projects around the world, including in the Permian Basin and offshore Guyana. These projects boast ultra-low production costs, which will enable the company to generate healthy cash flow growth even if oil prices decline. In the Permian Basin, for example, it can earn a 10% return on its investments in new wells at an oil price of less than $35 per barrel. Meanwhile, offshore Guyana can produce that same return at around $40 a barrel. Because of those low costs, Exxon can grow its cash flow by 55% by 2025, even if oil averages $40 a barrel. Given that view, the company should have plenty of fuel to keep growing its dividend, especially since crude oil is currently above plan at $63 a barrel.
Exxon's base plan would see it grow its cash flow by 7% per year through 2025, assuming oil prices remain roughly flat at around $60 a barrel. Meanwhile, it can still grow its cash flow at a healthy rate even if crude slumps to $40 a barrel. Because of cash flow growth, and its healthy balance sheet, it seems likely that Exxon will be able to continue increasing its high-yield dividend. That makes it a great stock for income-seeking investors.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Oil companies like Chevron (NYSE:CVX) are taking a double hit lately. First, oil prices have been relatively weak for several years. Second, carbon-based fuels are under increasing scrutiny due to their effect on the climate. These are two of the key reasons why Chevron's dividend yield is over 4%. But before you get stuck on the negatives, here are a few positives to consider that suggest now is actually a good time for dividend investors to put Chevron on their buy list.
Oil is a volatile commodity prone to big price swings. But Chevron is well aware of how the industry in which it operates works, which is why it has long focused on maintaining a strong balance sheet. This is the financial foundation of any company, and within the energy sector, Chevron's balance sheet is among the strongest.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
To put some numbers on that, the company's financial debt-to-equity ratio is roughly 0.15. That's a low number for any industry, but particularly conservative in the energy sector. Although fellow oil giant ExxonMobil's (NYSE:XOM) financial debt-to-equity ratio is roughly the same, most other peers sit at more than twice that level. This is the normal trend, with Chevron historically taking a conservative approach with regard to leverage. That flows through to the company's interest coverage; it can pay its interest expenses 24 times over. Exxon's times interest earned ratio is a touch better, but Chevron sits above all of the others in the group.   
The big takeaway here is that Chevron has plenty of room on its balance sheet to add debt if an industry downturn requires it. That's what it did when oil prices plummeted from over $100 a barrel in mid-2014 to below $30 in early 2016. Prices today are in the $50-to-$60 range and Chevron has actually been able to keep trimming debt. So, despite a tough market, the energy giant looks like it is on pretty solid financial ground.   
There's no question that oil prices have been volatile lately, with the commodity trading in a range that makes it tough for some industry participants to turn a profit. Smaller players have been going belly up in this environment, particularly in the U.S. onshore space. In fact, Reuters reports that law firm Haynes and Boone believes that bankruptcies are on pace to reach levels last seen in 2016, when oil prices finally started to bounce off of the lows following the 2014 downturn.   
Chevron won't be on the bankruptcy list because of its strong balance sheet. But there's another factor to consider here. Chevron believes its cash flow break-even point is roughly $51 per barrel. That's at the low end of the current oil price range and better than most of its peers. So it is actually relatively well-positioned to cover all of its expenses within the oil environment in which it is operating.    
Another positive here is that Chevron's capital spending plans aren't growing materially. In fact, it expects to spend around $20 billion or so each year through 2023, roughly about the same as it has spent since 2018. Exxon, for reference, has been ramping up its spending to reverse a production decline. But don't take that to mean that Chevron is backing away from production growth -- just the opposite is going on, with production expected to increase, on average, between 3% and 4% a year over the next five years. Put simply, Chevron is expecting to spend less than most of its rivals and yet continue to grow its business. That's a pretty desirable position to be in.   
So Chevron looks well-positioned in the oil industry, with relatively low costs, production growing, and a strong enough balance sheet to handle adversity if it needs to. So far, so good for income-oriented investors. But there's a long-term problem that needs to be examined: carbon. Oil and natural gas are carbon-based fuels that are expected to be displaced over time by cleaner alternatives, like electricity generated by solar and wind. The big question here, however, is when?
At this point, most industry watchers expect oil and natural gas to remain important contributors to the world's energy needs for decades to come. Exxon has made a point of highlighting how long energy transitions take because of the need to build infrastructure, with oil requiring roughly a century to displace coal. Royal Dutch Shell, meanwhile, has noted that someone has to supply the world with the oil it is still demanding. Notably, if companies don't keep drilling, it appears the bigger risk is that the world will have too little oil. That's doubly true given that few (if any) countries have been able to meet the carbon reduction goals they have set for themselves.
Accoring to Chevron's long term forecast in the image below, it appears that new supplies of 550 billion barrels of oil and 2,100 trillion cubic feet of natural gas will be needed to meet demand under current regulations. That means more drilling. And even if the world comes together to limit carbon emissions, it still looks like new supplies of 370 billion barrels of oil and 1,750 trillion cubic feet of natural gas will be needed. Once again that means more drilling. Yes, producing carbon fuels is an issue, but Wall Street appears to be overreacting to the risks here.  
IMAGE SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL. 
At this point, oil and natural gas don't look as though they will face a major threat from alternatives for a long time. Eventually oil and natural gas will fall from favor, but right now the world still needs these fuels in large quantities. 
Income investors looking for a reliable dividend stock should consider Chevron. It isn't a risk-free investment by any means, but the 4% yield is attractive (and on the high side of its historical range over the past 20 or so years). It appears well positioned financially and within the industry. And the carbon issue, while a threat, looks like it won't be a material headwind for many years. All told, now appears to be a pretty good time to consider adding Chevron to your dividend portfolio.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


