The Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI) finished Monday on a positive note, regaining their highs of the day and closing up 146 points, or nearly 1%. The Dow moved higher initially after positive reports of retail-sales growth in the U.S. economy, and just when it appeared that the average might give up all of its gains in the final hour of trading, the Dow bounced back and jumped more than 100 points in 45 minutes to finish near its highs of the day. Contributing to the gains were ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and Chevron (NYSE:CVX), both of which rose more than 1% in showing the continued importance of oil and gas exploration and production to the economy as a whole.
Looking at the fundamentals
At their most basic level, ExxonMobil and Chevron profit when oil and natural gas prices rise. Today, oil futures markets cooperated, with May crude rising $0.31 per barrel to climb above the $104 level and contracts further in the future rising by even larger amounts. Natural gas, on the other hand, edged down $0.06 to $4.56, as winter weather finally starts to wind down and give way to what has traditionally been a weaker season for the clean-burning fuel.
But the energy revolution in the U.S. has had ripple effects around the world, and Chevron and ExxonMobil have found themselves at the center of the resulting boom. Obviously, neither of the two massive oil giants can have their needles move nearly as easily as a small exploration and production company like Goodrich Petroleum, whose shares soared 30% Monday after announcing a solid hit on its bet in the Tuscaloosa Marine Shale play in the Mississippi Delta region. But given just how widespread discoveries like that have been, both in the U.S. and around the world, it takes a company the size of Exxon or Chevron to take full advantage of the scope of the energy boom going on worldwide.
SOURCE: CHEVRON.
Skeptics point out that it will be next to impossible for ExxonMobil or Chevron to sustain significant production growth over the long run. In order to overcome the natural decline of existing wells, the two companies would have to make massive acquisitions at what would likely be increasingly expensive prices. In many ways, shareholders might be better off if Chevron and ExxonMobil admit the upper limit of their size and work on maximizing the value of their depreciating assets. That won't stop the two companies from working on potential growth initiatives like Chevron's solar projects, but it does mean that investors don't fear them as much as they would other, less steward-like companies.
With the broader stock market on somewhat shaky ground, though, ExxonMobil and Chevron have the virtue of stability and consistent income, with shareholder capital returned through healthy dividends and huge buybacks. For those who fear corporate management teams that could fritter away billions in free cash flow, both Chevron and ExxonMobil have the discipline to act prudently. That's more than enough for many frightened investors right now, and if the energy boom continues, it could also lead to further gains for the two energy giants and their share prices.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Berkshire Hathaway's portfolio consists of 43 companies and is worth $92 billion. In 2013, the company purchased nearly 1% of ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM). This represents about 3.5% of Berkshire's overall holdings and about 50% of its investments in the energy sector. With a move this big investors might ask if they should consider purchasing Exxon themselves. This article will explore the potential reasons for Berkshire's investment in Exxon and explain why Chevron (NYSE:CVX) makes a better long-term investment. 
ExxonMobil and Chevron are America's two largest oil companies. They are very well diversified across the upstream and downstream segments, as well as internationally. Chevron also owns substantial refining capacity, while Exxon has a large position in chemical manufacturing (such as automotive oils). In addition, both companies have extensive retail exposure with their branded gas stations. 
They are fundamentally great long-term investments for several reasons.
The case for Exxon
Exxon is a master of reserve replacement with over 20 consecutive years of finding more oil than it produces. Thanks to 2013's 103% reserve replacement rate the company now has 25.2 billion barrels of proven reserves. This is sufficient to cover its annual production (4 million barrels per day, or bpd) for nearly 14 years. 
On the production expansion front, the company is pursing over 120 projects to produce a total of 24 billion barrels of oil. Twenty-four of these projects are scheduled to come online by 2017, including 10 in 2014 (2014's projects will increase daily production capacity by 300,000 bpd). 
The company spent $42.5 billion on capital expenditures, or capex, in 2013, is guiding for $39.8 billion in 2014, and under $37 billion in 2015-2017. 
Despite the decreasing investments, management is guiding for flat production growth in 2014 and 4% increased oil production in 2015-2017 (gas increases of 1%). The increased production and lower costs will result in margin growth on (already) above industry average profitability. 
Adding the fundamental strengths just mentioned to Exxon's investing history makes a good case for owning the stock. In the last 21 years Exxon has returned 12.5% CAGR (with dividend reinvestment), compared to the market's 9.5%. The company is a dividend aristocrat with 31 consecutive years of payout increases (dividend growth of 6.11% CAGR for the last 20 years).  
As a final cherry on top, the company is trading at an 18% discount to its historical valuation (21-year average P/E of 15 versus 12.3 today). On a yield basis, Exxon is now the cheapest it has been in three years. 
All of this makes a strong case for owning Exxon shares, except for one problem: Chevron is as strong of a company and a better relative investment. 
Why Chevron is better
SOURCE: MORNINGSTAR.
As seen above, Chevron, despite being just as safe and diversified an oil giant, outperforms Exxon in the areas investors care about most: earnings growth, profitability, yield, and dividend growth.
Chevron is also a dividend aristocrat with 25 years of consecutive dividend increases. 
However, the largest reason for investors to choose Chevron over Exxon is the company's near-term growth prospects. 
Over the next four years, Chevron plans to increase its capacity by 20%, from 2.6 mboe/d to 3.1 mboe/d. It plans to maintain its 2014 capex rate of $35.8 billion through this time, and to spend the funds on deepwater offshore drilling, shale oil, and the Tengizchevroil consortium. This last project is a partnership of companies developing the Tengiz super-giant oil field in Kazakhstan. Chevron owns 50% of the consortium. 
The increased production, when combined with flat capex, will likely result in dividend growth accelerating to about 9% annually over the next five years.

SOURCE: YCHARTS
As seen in the above chart, both Chevron and Exxon are trading at their highest yields since 2011. Given the massive size and scope of their businesses, investors can be assured that neither company's survival is ever likely to be threatened. This makes either company a good "buy and hold forever" investment. 
Chevron's recent price weakness is a result of an earnings warning issued by the company. Poor weather in the U.S., Canada, and Kazakhstan during the fourth quarter, along with increased refinery maintenance and foreign currency effects, will cause the company to miss earnings by about $0.2 per share. 
Investors can use this short-sighted market overreaction to accumulate undervalued shares and lock in a historically high yield with probable strong dividend growth in the years to come. 
Foolish takeaway
ExxonMobil is a terrific company, and investors are likely to do well owning its shares over the long term (especially given how undervalued it is). However, due to its higher yield, faster dividend growth, and better short- to medium-term growth prospects (as well as higher profitability and equal undervaluation), I believe Chevron is a better long-term investment. 


Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


