Value investing can frustrate even the most patient of stock pickers, Fool contributor Tim Beyers says in the following video.
Why? Cheap stocks tend to be unpopular in both cold and hot markets like the one we're in now. Investors can spend years waiting for Mr. Market to pay a fair price for their underappreciated holdings.
Look at ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM). Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway recently acquired more than 40 million shares of the integrated energy giant; but, at 12.7 times earnings, the stock still trades for a sharp discount to both the wider industry and the S&P 500. ExxonMobil and peer Chevron have also badly underperformed the index this year. Say what you will about the quality of ExxonMobil's business -- it's still a laggard heading into 2014.
There's no surefire strategy for avoiding such short-term losers. Your best approach, Tim says, is to buy Dividend Aristocrats. Stocks with a track record of consistently hiking dividend payments tend to outperform over the long term. Reinvesting the proceeds (a free service with most brokerages) can protect against poor performers while geometrically improving your long-term returns.
Now it's your turn to weigh in. What is your value investing strategy for 2014? What cheap stocks do you like most right now? Please watch the video to get Tim's full take, and then leave a comment to let us know where you stand.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Although we don't believe in timing the market or panicking over daily movements, we do like to keep an eye on market changes -- just in case they're material to our investing thesis.
This morning, the Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI) did their best to end a three-day streak of declines, rising 16 points as of 11 a.m. EST. On the economic data front, a drop of 0.1% in the Producer Price Index for November should give the Federal Reserve ample latitude to take whatever stimulus policy measures it chooses next week, and investors so far seem content to wait before taking decisive action in either direction today. Visa (NYSE:V) and Boeing (NYSE:BA) provided the biggest boost to the Dow this morning in point terms and helping to offset weakness elsewhere.
The PPI report from the Bureau of Labor Statistics showed falling prices at every stage of production, with finished goods down 0.1%, intermediate goods dropping 0.5%, and crude goods sliding 2.6%. Energy was once again the main driver of falling prices, with crude energy prices falling 6.6% and leading to 1.5% drops in intermediate-stage energy prices and a 0.4% decline at the finished-goods level. Interestingly, those factors didn't seem to affect Dow energy giants ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and Chevron (NYSE:CVX), which traded in opposite directions in modest moves today. Yet that likely reflects the fact that for Exxon and Chevron, keeping production levels stable and growing is at least as important as a healthy price environment, as the Big Oil companies face the huge challenge of offsetting dropping production from aging wells in existing oil fields.
Falling prices appear to be helping consumers, though, and that bodes well for Visa, given its reliance on consumer spending to drive its revenue. Visa hit all-time highs on Wednesday as rival MasterCard took positive action for its shareholders, boosting dividends, announcing a buyback, and splitting its stock 10-for-1. With so much of the world just now moving toward electronic-based payment systems, the potential for both companies to carve up the emerging world could sustain growth for years to come.
The increase in Boeing's stock price is surprising given the labor disputes that the aircraft manufacturer is facing. Boeing's machinists union in Washington state this week rejected another contract offer from the company, leading Boeing to reiterate its ongoing process to seek alternative sites for its key 777X aircrat production. Yet investors remain focused on Boeing's huge potential, with possibly trillions of dollars in orders over the next 20 years setting the stage for long-term success from the aerospace giant if it can handle its ongoing execution challenges.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


