The S&P 500 index is up 14.2% year to date and the Nasdaq Composite has climbed 41.8% over the same timeframe, but not every industry has thrived in this difficult year. Companies in the energy sector have struggled following the collapse of oil prices in February. Though crude oil has somewhat rebounded, the average barrel is still cheaper than it has been in years. This has caused some issues that ripple through various industries and energy subsectors. 
Exploration and production companies generate fewer dollars for every barrel pumped and sold, but the operating expenses and capital investment required the generate those volumes remain the same. This creates a squeeze for equipment suppliers, refiners, and transportation and pipeline companies. With profits threatened across the industry, fewer lenders are willing to provide capital, which drives the cost of capital higher for the energy sector, further eating into profits.
As a result, investors have lost interest in energy sector stocks, sending prices downward and wiping out billions in equity value. Here are some of the companies getting hit as a result.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) is the largest energy stock on U.S. exchanges, with a $179 billion market cap. Shares are down roughly 38.6% for the year, representing roughly $112 billion in equity value. The integrated oil and gas giant is struggling with the aforementioned low crude oil prices, and it even suffered removal from the Dow Jones Industrial Index after nearly 100 years on that list.
Investors will hope that sustained demand from transportation and utilities will support crude oil prices moving forward, while expanding middle classes and economic activity in emerging markets will create catalysts. Regardless, significant damage has been done this year, building upon several years of losses.
IMAGE SOURCE: YCHARTS.
Phillips 66 (NYSE:PSX) engages in the transportation, refining, and marketing of oil products and specialty chemicals. The company has struggled to deliver profits in the current environment, with especially large losses in the refining segment.
Among other one-time issues, the refinement business is being hurt by tighter spreads between crude prices and marketed materials, leading to narrow margins and elusive profits. Phillips 66 is down about 38.9% year to date, losing nearly $20 billion in market value for shareholders. If oil prices remain low, this downstream leader will continue to experience challenges. However, the right-sizing of price spreads should eventually provide relief in the refining business, which has shown sequential improvements since the second quarter turbulence. Phillips 66 is delivering profits in all of its other business segments, so investors can be optimistic that the worst damage is behind the stock.
Kinder Morgan (NYSE:KMI) is a large energy infrastructure company that owns more than 83,000 miles of pipelines and 147 terminals. The company cited decreased overall energy demand due to the pandemic in its latest quarterly financial release, and this obviously translates to lower revenue for a company with large fixed expenses related to its physical equipment. Despite dealing with these issues, the company's adjusted profits are only down 10% year over year through three quarters, and the stock's dividend was actually raised 5% over the prior year. 
While these results may seem more encouraging than those reported by other companies in the energy sector, the market has still turned on Kinder Morgan. The stock is down 29.7% year to date. At its current $32.5 billion market cap, $14.1 billion in value has been wiped out for shareholders. 
Schlumberger (NYSE:SLB) is an oilfield services company that provides equipment, technology, project management, and IT services to the energy industry. Energy companies are reducing production and investing less in exploration and oilfield development, meaning the demand for Schlumberger's services are taking a major hit. The company reported a 38% decrease in revenue year over year in the third quarter, with an even larger drop in adjusted earnings. Schlumberger's management has made efforts to reduce expenses and divest underperforming business segments, but the company will continue to struggle until the sector stabilizes. 
Investors have fled from Schlumberger in the equity market. The company's market cap has dropped almost $24 billion as the stock fell 43% year to date.
EOG Resources (NYSE:EOG) is an oil and gas exploration and production company that derives its vast majority of revenue from North America. Exploration and production companies have a fairly straightforward model that involves the extraction and sales of oil and gas, and they simply make less money when oil prices remain low for extended periods. Adding to the trouble, they still have to honor certain contracts, pay many of their employees, and make interest payments on loans that don't change when crude oil drops. EOG stock is down about 37.1% year to date, wiping out $18 billion in market capitalization.
Most of these companies have delivered sequential improvements after large shocks earlier this year. Most forecasts call for very modest improvements in energy prices in 2021, with the continued impact of COVID-19 lingering over the global economy. Risks remain in this industry, but the steep losses of shareholder value in the energy sector this year could present an attractive entry point for investors who think crude oil will rebound moving forward.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


The oil industry has had had a strange decade as the seeming rise and fall of oil stocks have happened over and over again. The decade started with depressed demand because of a global recession, but ended with surging oil demand in the U.S. and abroad as SUV sales increased and the global economy made a slow but steady recovery. 
2020 changed everything and brought out the industry's warts, as a global pandemic hit demand across the world. Prices even went negative for a short time. This dynamic has hurt oil stocks that have for the most part been in decline over the last two years. And we may already be seeing the end of oil's dominance in energy on the horizon. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The first thing to look at for oil stocks is what direction operations are headed. Is revenue rising? Are margins improving or at least staying steady? Or is the business generally in decline? 
To get a broad look at where the oil industry is headed, take a look at the chart below, which shows revenue and operating margins for ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM), Chevron (NYSE:CVX), and Royal Dutch Shell (LSE:RDSA). These three companies are big and diverse, giving us a big-picture view of the oil industry today. 

XOM REVENUE (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS. TTM = TRAILING 12 MONTHS.
What you can see is that revenue and margins are in a long-term decline. Those aren't good trends for the industry and tell us a little bit about why oil stocks are in decline. But understanding why they are performing poorly also says a lot. 
On the demand side, oil isn't in a terrible position, but there are some negative signs. You can see below that global oil consumption continues to grow steadily, but in the U.S., consumption has been flat for two decades and was in a steady decline until the last five years, when an economic boom drove increased SUV sales. 

US OIL CONSUMPTION DATA BY YCHARTS.
There are a number of factors affecting oil margins, but there are a few that stand out: 
In reality, there's a limit on growth and margins for oil companies. And that limits the opportunity for investors. 
Everything I've laid out indicates that oil companies are in for a structural decline in operations over the next few decades. And these aren't crazy to point out because oil companies themselves agree with the bleak assessment. 
BP said in its 2020 energy outlook that demand for oil will fall over the next 30 years as EVs take market share. Management has also said it will produce less oil a decade from now than it does today as it invests more in cleaner energy investments. 
The Wall Street Journal recently reported that ExxonMobil has also cut its expectations for oil prices by between 11% and 17% versus previous projections. The company has also released plans to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, a huge shift for the oil giant.
If big oil thinks the best days are behind us, then what should we expect but a decline in the industry. 
All indications are that oil is in for a decline in demand over the next decade or more, and that won't help the operations of any oil stocks. Some companies will strike oil and beat the market, and others may make a successful shift to renewable energy. But there are better energy investments than buying into a dying industry and hoping it can make a shift to a new industry altogether. I would stay far away from oil stocks today. 




Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021



