Investing in ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) has been an extremely frustrating endeavor over the past few years. Management's plans to grow earnings could make your mouth water, but tepid earnings results were enough to give anyone a headache. 
This past quarter, though, the company's results started to show the slightest hints of how this growth plan will affect the bottom line. The company also gave the green light to several of its key needle-moving development projects that will get it one step closer to achieving those ambitious goals.
Let's look at Exxon's most recent earnings results and see why investors should be pleased with the progress management has made thus far. 
DATA SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL EARNINGS RELEASE. EPS= EARNINGS PER SHARE.
Considering oil prices dropped 40% over the course of the fourth quarter to less than $50 a barrel, these results don't look as bad as one might have assumed. One thing that was working in ExxonMobil's favor was higher natural gas prices. As big oil peer Royal Dutch Shell reported earlier this week, natural gas price realizations were some of the highest we've seen in years. That, plus one-time gains for the sale of its refinery and associated assets in Italy, as well as its retail network in Germany, helped to push refining earnings higher. 
DATA SOURCE: EXXONMOBIL EARNINGS RELEASE. CHART BY AUTHOR. *ADJUSTED TO EXCLUDE THE IMPACT OF U.S. TAX CHANGES AND ASSET IMPAIRMENTS.
For the most part, Exxon's management didn't give a whole lot of details about its plans, beyond what it had already presented at last year's security analyst and investor day meetings. Since its next meeting is in March, it's probably leaving the good stuff until then. When asked about its capital spending levels for 2019, though, CEO Darren Woods hinted that it will continue to emphasize its projects in the Permian Basin and offshore Guyana:
Going into 2019 we expect to be around 30 billion, and that does reflect the progress and the opportunities that we're seeing in Guyana, the upside that we've seen there as well as the Permian. We just talked a little bit about the Permian, because I think one of the things we're challenging ourselves with and looking at the unconventional resources is what value, what unique value can ExxonMobil bring to this resource play? And so we have spent the year really making sure that we understand the play that we've got, doing some delineation but at the same time leveraging the full capability of ExxonMobil to bring scale and scale development along with technology -- additional technology and research into the Permian. So I think what you'll hear in March is a good overview around how ExxonMobil is uniquely coming into the unconventional resources to make this a low-cost, long-term successful development play.
You can read a full transcript of ExxonMobil's conference call.
Check out all our earnings call transcripts.  

XOM DATA BY YCHARTS
ExxonMobil has been lambasted in recent years because of its declining production and because its rates of return are no longer the cream of the crop among its integrated oil and gas peers. The plan it put out last year was promising some ambitious targets for earnings, but it involved spending lots of money at a time when others were focusing on more disciplined spending and share buybacks. 
This quarter showed some of the early signs that this plan will work. Total production was up only slightly from last year, but liquids production was up 7% and more than offset deliberate decisions to divest some assets and not invest in maintaining less profitable U.S. gas production. More importantly, these new production sources are profitable at much lower prices.
With several new green-lighted projects in all three business segments, investors should expect higher capital spending in 2019, which are likely to lead to lower free cash flow. As these projects come to fruition, though, they should deliver significant bottom-line results and make it worth investors while to stick around.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Oil is a volatile commodity prone to frequent and dramatic price swings. That was made clear in 2018, when oil plunged into a bear market in just a matter of weeks in the back half of the year. Despite near-term ups and downs, though, oil remains a vital source of energy. If you are looking at the sector, you should make sure to include at least one energy company in your portfolio that can ride the highs and lows in stride. That basically means you should buy either ExxonMobil Corporation (NYSE:XOM) or Chevron Corporation (NYSE:CVX), two U.S. energy giants with real staying power.
In 2012, ConocoPhillips (NYSE:COP) enacted a major corporate overhaul. It spun off its downstream assets (which is what refining and chemicals businesses are called in industry lingo) so it could focus on its upstream (or drilling) business. This shift meant oil and natural gas prices were the main factor driving the company's top and bottom lines. When oil prices plummeted in mid-2014, going from over $100 a barrel to the $30 range, it wasn't long before ConocoPhillips was forced to cut its dividend.
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
The 66% dividend cut in 2016 was a painful hit for income investors. And while ConocoPhillips has been increasing its dividend lately, that dividend cut should always be in the back of your mind, because the next oil downturn could lead to a repeat. Neither Exxon nor Chevron cut their dividends during that rough spot for the oil market. 
One key reason why is that Exxon and Chevron have diversified operations encompassing both the upstream and downstream sides of the energy business. This is important because the refining and chemicals businesses they operate use oil and natural gas as key inputs. Low prices, then, are a net benefit because they lead to lower operating costs on the chemicals and refining side.
To put a number on that, Exxon's upstream earnings declined nearly 75% in 2015. But the company's downstream earnings roughly doubled, helping to offset the hit from low oil prices and limit the company's overall earnings decline to just 50% or so. And in 2014, 2015, and 2016, Exxon was able to raise its dividend. Chevon, which is a little more heavily weighted toward oil drilling, hiked its dividend at the end of 2014, held its dividend steady throughout 2015, and increased it again at the end of 2016.   
The inherent balance in these companies' business models is important, but there's another key factor to consider with Exxon and Chevron: rock-solid balance sheets. One of the best ways to see this is looking at financial debt to equity. Both Exxon and Chevron sit at the low end of their closest peers on this metric, which examines how much leverage a company uses. That's pretty much where this pair always sits when it comes to debt.

XOM FINANCIAL DEBT TO EQUITY (QUARTERLY) DATA BY YCHARTS.
That gives Exxon and Chevron more leeway to use debt to maintain operations when energy prices inevitably fall. For example, going into the 2014 downturn, Chevron's long-term debt stood at around $20 billion, or about 12% of the capital structure. That's a very low number for any industry. To maintain its capital spending and support its dividend during that deep energy bear market, the company increased its leverage, upping long-term debt to around $35.2 billion by the end of 2016.   
That 75% increase in long-term debt only pushed Chevron's long-term debt to around 20% of the capital structure -- a still reasonable, perhaps even conservative number. With oil prices up off their lows, Chevron has started to reduce its debt again. The picture at Exxon, by the way, is roughly similar, only Exxon has historically been even more conservative on the debt front.   
The mixture of balanced business models and industry-leading balance sheets is what makes Exxon and Chevron so resilient to oil downturns. It helps explain why their streaks of annual dividend increases are at 36 years and 31 years, respectively. It's rare for any company in any industry to achieve a dividend record like that, let alone companies that operate in a highly volatile commodity sector.   

XOM DIVIDEND DATA BY YCHARTS.
Here's the thing: Even though ConocoPhillips' financial debt to equity is similarly low today, it doesn't have the portfolio balance provided by downstream operations. And while Italy's Eni S.p.A. has a diversified business, its heavy use of leverage makes it harder for the company to get through oil price swings without taking drastic actions (like cutting the dividend during the 2014 oil downturn). One or the other isn't really enough -- a company needs a balanced business and a strong balance sheet.
Check out the latest Exxon, Chevron, and ConocoPhillips earnings call transcripts.
The steep drop in oil in the back half of 2018 is a reminder that the energy industry is volatile. Unless you are attempting to time the ups and downs of oil and natural gas (not a great long-term investment tactic for most investors), you are better off sticking to a company with a balanced business model and a conservative balance sheet. On that score, two names stand out: ExxonMobil and Chevron. If you are interested in the energy sector, one of these two stocks should be in your portfolio.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


If you're looking for a solid dividend yield from an energy stock, two names that might be on your list are ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) and Brookfield Renewable Partners (NYSE:BEP). While one is the epitome of big oil and the other is more representative of the future of energy, both are known for their high dividend yields, strong cash flows that keep those payouts secure, and long track records of growing their dividend payments on a regular basis. 
Furthermore, both have things in their favor that could make them compelling investments right now. ExxonMobil sits on some of the cheapest oil and gas assets in the world and plans to better-leverage its integrated business could see it pump a gusher of profits in coming years. On the other hand, Brookfield Renewable owns some of the best, cheapest, renewable energy-producing assets in the world, and its management has proved incredibly skilled at growing its cash flows over time. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
So which is the better buy right now? The turnaround play in ExxonMobil, or the up-and-comer in Brookfield Renewable? 
It's been a bit of a lost decade for the oil giant, and its investors. Since Jan. 31, 2009, 10 years before this writing, ExxonMobil's stock price has dropped 4.3%, while the broader stock market has come soaring out of the ashes of the Global Financial Crisis:

XOM DATA BY YCHARTS
It may not seem like a fair comparison, considering the past decade has been one of the longest, best bull markets in American history. But that's kind of the point. Even from the bottoms of the worst stock market decline in 80 years, which should be a huge head-start on strong future returns, ExxonMobil has made for a terrible investment. 
Heck, it's even underperformed bonds over the past decade:  

XOM TOTAL RETURN PRICE DATA BY YCHARTS
Yet even as it struggled to deliver decent value for shareholders, it did continue to deliver industry-leading returns:

XOM RETURN ON INVESTED CAPITAL (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS
The problem is that, over the past decade -- particularly the past half-decade, since oil prices have fallen from the $100-plus peak in 2014 -- the company hasn't been able to turn those returns on investments into bigger profits. ExxonMobil's earnings per share were actually 28% less than they were 10 years before, and that's after a big improvement over the past year: 

XOM EPS DILUTED (TTM) DATA BY YCHARTS
Which brings us to the bull case. ExxonMobil is in the early stages of a strategy that's aimed at better leveraging its ultra-cheap oil holdings, and its integrated assets, to turn more of every barrel of oil it pumps, refines, or sells, into more profits. By 2025, management says it will have doubled cash flows from 2018 levels. 
That's an ambitious plan, but ExxonMobil continues to be one of the best in the business at capital allocation. Many of its struggles over the past decade have been tied to the reality that oil sells for about 60% of the price it commanded for much of the first half of the past decade. From here out, ExxonMobil aims to be a low-cost leader starting with its oil production, and then leveraging its operating assets to yield industry-leading returns. 
If it does that, buying shares today for about 13 times trailing earnings could turn out to be one of the best bargains of the decade. Add in a dividend that yields 4.4% and tends to get a bump every year, and this big-oil behemoth could be a huge winner. 
Check out the latest Exxon earnings call transcript.
While ExxonMobil has struggled to deliver decent returns for its shareholders over the past decade, Brookfield Renewable Partners, which owns a collection of hydroelectric, wind, and solar energy-producing assets, has been a pretty great investment:

BEP TOTAL RETURN PRICE DATA BY YCHARTS
At its core, it's because Brookfield Renewable's core business is not tied to a volatile and unpredictable commodity like oil, but a far-more predictable commodity, electricity. In short, Brookfield renewable makes a living producing electricity and then selling it to utilities. Almost all of its production is sold under long-term contracts at fixed prices that include escalators for inflation.
Furthermore, unlike oil, Brookfield Renewable doesn't deal with a volatile commodity it must buy to produce electricity, though variances in wind, sun, and rainfall do affect how much power its facilities produce and it can sell. The end result is a business that generates remarkably steady, predictable cash flows, a large portion of which management is committed to return to shareholders. 
At recent prices, Brookfield Renewable dividend yield is a generous 6.8%, and management's long-term goal is to increase the payout between 5% and 9% annually. It's certainly been able to do that; over the past five years, the payout has been raised every year, and it's up nearly 90%. 
Moreover, it has one of the best pathways to future growth of any company in the energy industry. Between the impacts of hydrocarbon emissions on the climate and environment, the higher cost of energy from coal, nuclear, and even natural gas, renewables like wind, solar, and hydro are set to gain the majority of future investments. According to a recent company presentation, it would require $5 trillion in investments globally simply to get half the world's energy production shifted to renewables. Want to see a 100% renewable-energy future? Move the needle to $11 trillion. 
IMAGE SOURCE: GETTY IMAGES.
That's a massive market opportunity. Furthermore, Brookfield Renewables is already winning the cost battle. Wind energy is cost-competitive with any other source of electricity, while solar is quickly closing the gap. As technology improves and drives the cost of power generation down even further, investments in renewables are likely to accelerate further. 
And as Brookfield Renewables has already proved over the past decade, the best place to invest is in the power-generating assets, and no other management team has shown itself to be as skilled at capital allocation over the long term. 
While there's much to like about ExxonMobil's prospects, I think investors will do much better over the long term to invest in Brookfield Renewable Partners. As much as ExxonMobil continues to deliver high rates of return, owns some great low-cost oil and gas assets, and should be able to leverage its integrated business to deliver even better future returns, there are too many questions surrounding fossil fuels for me to pick it over Brookfield Renewable. 
Frankly, there's no predicting whether oil prices will rise, fall, or hold steady in the future -- though they will almost certainly do all three at different points -- and more importantly, it's hard to predict how much future demand for oil will grow. 
Renewables, however, will certainly continue to grow in demand, while costs will fall. And since I'd rate Brookfield Renewables' management team right up there with ExxonMobil's when it comes to discipline and strong capital deployment skills, you have to go with the business that has the better, more predictable path forward. 
And that's clearly Brookfield Renewable Partners. 



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


