Although we don't believe in timing the market or panicking over daily movements, we do like to keep an eye on market changes -- just in case they're material to our investing thesis.
The Dow Jones Industrials (DJINDICES:^DJI) plunged again today, falling nearly 200 points even though investors pretty much got the news they expected with the Federal Reserve's decision to further reduce its bond-buying activity under quantitative easing. Yet even as international and macroeconomic concerns weigh on the Dow, three of its components will report earnings tomorrow morning. What 3M (NYSE:MMM), Visa (NYSE:V), and ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) say about their respective results could well set the tone for the Dow both tomorrow and throughout the first part of 2014.
Visa starts things off with its earnings conference call at 8:30 a.m. EST, and since it has traditionally released its results after the market close in the past, it's uncertain when it will issue a press release this time around. 3M will hold a conference call on its results at 9 a.m. EST, with investors expecting its press release around 7:30 a.m. EST. ExxonMobil rounds things by issuing its earnings press release at 8 a.m. EST and following up with an 11 a.m. EST conference call, after releasing
For Visa earnings, investors come into the release with high hopes that the credit card network giant can withstand concerns about international prospects to produce continued strong growth. Even though the data breach debacle at Target threw a wrench into consumer sentiment about using credit and debit cards amid widespread identity theft and fraud, Visa looks to be on track to continue reaping its share of growing demand both domestically and internationally. While its rivals are also working hard to share in the growth of the electronic payments industry, Visa remains the leader in the space and is positioned to remain there for the foreseeable future.
3M earnings, on the other hand, involve more modest revenue growth, as the company known for office supplies and adhesives aims to use its reputation for innovation to drive new product development. Forays into the electronics and solar industries could produce some growth opportunities for 3M, but investors will also be looking at how much of the company's growth comes from recent outside acquisitions compared to internal expansion of existing business divisions.
ExxonMobil earnings could present the biggest challenge of all to the Dow, as the energy giant struggles to keep production levels and total revenue from declining too substantially. Falling oil prices will likely produce lower sales even if Exxon can maintain production, but the bright spot could come from the company's natural gas exposure. With prices for nat gas rising in the U.S., Exxon could finally start to get a payoff from its acquisition of XTO Energy back in 2009.
Finally, note that all three of these stocks have relatively high share prices, giving them a combined weight of 18%. If they all move in concert, these stocks could definitely have a big impact on the Dow's overall performance on Thursday.




Before you consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return), you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (Price Return) wasn't on the list.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


ExxonMobil (NYSE:XOM) will release its quarterly report on Thursday, and as much as U.S. drivers have appreciated falling gasoline prices over the past several months, investors in the oil giant are bracing themselves for the likely negative impact on ExxonMobil earnings from those trends. Even as rival Chevron (NYSE:CVX) has warned of poor production results in its December quarter, ExxonMobil should still have some advantages over BP (NYSE:BP) and other foreign oil companies that don't have as much exposure to the domestic energy market.
It's hard to appreciate the sheer size of ExxonMobil, which has flirted with a well-known tech giant for the status of the U.S.'s most valuable company. Yet maintaining that size is a constant challenge for ExxonMobil, which has to search for new production opportunities at the same time that it tries to find innovative new ways to provide energy alternatives and tap into ultra-long-term trends that could eliminate its traditional fossil-fuel business within the next few generations. The question investors face is whether the company has the vision to make it through what could be a huge transition in energy in the years and decades to come. Let's take an early look at what's been happening with ExxonMobil over the past quarter and what we're likely to see in its report.
SOURCE: FLICKR/MINALE TATTERSFIELD
Stats on ExxonMobil
Analyst EPS Estimate
$1.92
Change From Year-Ago EPS
(12.7%)
Revenue Estimate
$113.99 billion
Change From Year-Ago Revenue
(1%)
Earnings Beats in Past 4 Quarters
3
SOURCE: YAHOO! FINANCE
Which way will ExxonMobil earnings move this quarter?
Analysts have gotten less excited about ExxonMobil earnings in recent months, cutting their fourth-quarter estimates by $0.06 per share and reducing their full-year 2014 projections by roughly double that amount. The stock has nevertheless climbed higher, rising 9% since late October.
Exxon's third-quarter-earnings report showed the challenges that the energy giant has struggled to overcome recently. Net income dropped 18%, with revenue falling by 2.4% despite a better-than-expected performance in growing production for the quarter by 1.5%. Yet price declines weighed especially hard on the downstream refining segment, sending the division's earnings down 81% and overwhelming a 12% jump in upstream-segment earnings.
One big concern that investors have had for a long time about ExxonMobil is whether it's aggressive enough in finding and capitalizing on production prospects. The company is well-known for its discipline in selecting only those projects that meet its internal requirements, but that has led to Exxon being conspicuously absent in certain promising areas. For instance, Chevron, BP, and other producers have done a better job of tapping the Gulf of Mexico's deepwater plays. Moreover, Exxon hasn't had nearly as much exposure to domestic shale plays as you'd expect from its size and influence in the industry.
But Exxon got a huge vote of confidence from an unexpected corner this quarter, as Warren Buffett added the stock to his list of holdings by taking a $3.4 billion position in the oil giant. Given Exxon's extremely low earnings multiples compared to the rest of the stock market, the investment seems like a natural one for Buffett. Yet perhaps the more important factor is that the buy indicates Buffett's belief that Exxon has the growth potential to avoid becoming just a declining cash cow in an evolving industry.
Still, Exxon will continue to face challenges. The company's production mix isn't ideal, with just 53% of production representing oil and liquids compared to almost 67% at Chevron. Yet as U.S. natural-gas prices have started to rise recently, Exxon's gas exposure could turn out to be a net positive in the long run. In particular, Exxon has been part of plans to build a huge $45 billion natural-gas-export project in Alaska, involving a new natural-gas counterpart to the Alaska Pipeline to bring natural gas from the North Slope to the Kenai Peninsula and a $25 billion gas liquefaction plant. With the Alaska state government coming on board, the project could potentially move the needle even for a company of Exxon's size.
In the ExxonMobil earnings report, look at the breakdown between the energy giant's upstream and downstream results to get a sense of future trends in the industry. But also bear in mind that exploration and production will continue to play the key role in Exxon's growth going forward, so look for promising new projects that could drive growth in the long run.



Before you consider Exxon Mobil Corporation, you'll want to hear this.
Investing legends and Motley Fool Co-founders David and Tom Gardner just revealed what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy right now... and Exxon Mobil Corporation wasn't one of them.
The online investing service they've run for nearly two decades, Motley Fool Stock Advisor, has beaten the stock market by over 4X.* And right now, they think there are 10 stocks that are better buys.
See the 10 stocks

*Stock Advisor returns as of February 24, 2021


Click here to add ExxonMobil to My Watchlist, which can find all of our Foolish analysis on it and all your other stocks.
